Former provincial head of detective services Brigadier
Clifford Marion says state capture would never have happened if the Scorpions
had not been disbanded in 2009. The Pietermaritzburg resident said it broke his heart to
look at the “disgraceful” state of law enforcement in the country, where most
of those appointed in positions of power were more focused on covering up crime
than bringing culprits to book. “This country needs strong-willed leaders and people who do
not compromise on law enforcement and the rule of law, people who don’t look at
faces when they are investigating but look at the evidence.” Marion started his career in law enforcement as a reservist
in 1977, after matriculating from a Greytown high school, and rose to be one of
the country’s most decorated detectives, investigating everything from
factional fights between tribes in Msinga to political violence in the
Midlands. He said the crime rate could be reduced drastically if there
was the will to do so in those in positions of power in law enforcement,
government and politics. “I’ve never, in my 40 years of service, on a single occasion
compromised on anything. When it came to telling the truth I did that even when
it was setting free the accused because that was based on evidence. But now we
have law enforcement officers who are paid to manufacture evidence, and justice
is being compromised and making South Africa the laughing stock of the world.” He said there were some competent officers but they were
blocked from doing their jobs. “When are we going to get people who are going to bring back
the glory and respect we had as a country when we had the Scorpions?” He said a lot of truth was going to come out during the
ongoing State Capture Commission but he was doubtful that the law enforcement
agencies had the capacity to turn the evidence presented by witnesses into
convictions. Marion carries fond memories of his time as the regional
head of the Scorpions from 1999 until the unit was disbanded in 2009. He was
the most senior chief officer in the task team that was appointed to set up the
first batch of Scorpions and had to interview people from across the country to
join the then prestigious investigative team. “We became a world-class organisation and I’m saying this
with conviction and real sincerity because I’ve been there … We were one of the
most feared and respected law enforcement agencies in the world,” he said. He said things started turning sour for the Scorpions when
they showed they would not compromise on enforcing the law and the likes of
Schabir Shaik and former president Jacob Zuma were investigated. He said the 2007 ANC national conference in Polokwane was
the end for the unit as the ruling party resolved to disband it. “I know that some of the people who went to that conference
and voted to kill the Scorpions were drunk out of their minds. One drunk was
nearly knocked over by a plane at the airstrip right here (in Pietermaritzburg)
but they were given power to decide on the fate of law enforcement in South
Africa. “That’s why we have what we have today, a compromised South
African Police Service, a compromised NPA and a compromised law enforcement
where people are put in place so that they could cover up crime. You look at
the Scorpions and then look at the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation
now — it’s a disgrace.” The Scorpions applied a unique investigative method called
the “troika” which was a strategy of teaming up investigators, analysts and
prosecutors from the start of an investigation to ensure that they had a solid
case before going to trial. “We would never have had state capture if the Scorpions were
there because they would have acted immediately before the situation escalated
to what it is today,” said Marion. Marion rejoined the SAPS after the end of his tenure with
the Scorpions and was appointed the provincial head of detectives in 2012. He said he was forced to retire last year at the age of 60
even after he had made numerous submissions to his superiors in an application
to serve until the age of 65. “I could have stayed on for another five years contributing
towards law enforcement in this country but I was told to leave.” Fortunately he was appointed as an investigator for the
Moerane Commission on political killings in February last year. He had to
juggle both positions for a few months until he officially left his SAPS job in
May. WEALTH OF EXPERIENCE NOT 
EXPLOITED Marion said there were dozens of retired police officers
around the country whose experience and competencies could contribute towards
crime fighting initiatives by working with those who were still on the force. “There are many competent retired officers who are willing
to continue serving their country but they are being sidelined.” He said he was still prepared to serve in law enforcement to
bring back South Africa’s glory of the Scorpions days. The father-of-three said he would be available himself for
programmes related to “imparting my specialised, professional and very mature
knowledge through lecturing at specialised detective training centres and train
young detectives”. He said he would also be available to serve in the SAPS
advisory council, which monitors the SAPS and advises the national commissioner
on how to improve service delivery in the three main disciplines on law
enforcement which are; crime detection, crime prevention and crime intelligence
gathering. “In our field of work you can take a book and read it which
doesn’t mean anything but if someone like myself comes in and uses life
experiences similar to those depicted in the book then it becomes easier to
explain and we can explore several scenarios on how one can investigate that
case and putting together evidence that will help secure a conviction.” MARION’S INVESTIGATIONS INTO POLITICAL VIOLENCE Brigadier Marion investigated hundreds of incidents of
political violence including the so-called “Seven Day War”, which claimed close
to 100 lives in the Midlands. He also probed the much publicised 1995 Christmas Day
massacres in Shobashobane, near Port Shepstone and the assassination of the
United Democratic Movement leader Sifiso Nkabinde in Richmond, in 1999. He has been part of several investigative task units that
probed political killings for commissions such as the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and recently the Moerane Commission which recently submitted its
report to Premier Willies Mchunu. It all started in 1985 when Marion — who was a lieutenant
stationed at the Edendale Halfway House at the time — was first assigned to
investigate political violence. “We come from a very dark past and the period between 1985
and 1993 was the worst (in terms of the violence) and the worst in the country
was KwaZulu-Natal, more specifically right here in Pietermaritzburg and the
Midlands.” In 1985, Marion said, the South African government and
military intelligence had decided to “partner with all the so-called
independent states” such as Qwaqwa and Bophuthatswana but KwaZulu-Natal was not
given total independence. KZN was given the status of a homeland with the IFP
leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi as the prime minister. “I later learned the reason they did that was to have a hold
over the IFP and have, in KZN, the capacity to fight the ANC because the
organisation was very strong in this province,” he said. Marion said in 1986 the government transported hundreds of
IFP recruits to receive military training in the Caprivi Strip, in Namibia. He said some of the trainees would come back and infiltrate
the ANC cells and hand over the information to those who put together dossiers
which were given to the decision-makers in the provincial legislature, in
Ulundi. Those reports ended up with the military intelligence in
Pretoria who would decide on which ANC activists should be eliminated. Marion said 140 tons of arms and ammunition were delivered
to the KZN legislature to be distributed throughout the indunas and IFP leaders
in the province. “They were all coming up with this defensive type of mode to
say that because Nelson Mandela had declared an arms struggle and didn’t
withdraw it, they were then defending themselves against the ANC. That was
their argument all the time, even at the TRC.” Ironically the secret programme to arm the IFP against the
ANC was called “Operation Marion” and the Brigadier never knew that until after
he was appointed by Mandela into the task team to investigate the political hit
squads after the release of the report by the Goldstone Commission in 1994. The
commission was appointed by former president F. W. de Klerk to investigate
political violence and intimidation that took place between July 1991 and the
first democratic election in 1994. “When the file on Operation Marion was found during one of
the raids the president [Mandela] called me, and [Sidney] Mafumadi (who was the
Minister of Safety and Security at the time) also called to ask why my name was
on the cover but I was just as shocked as they were to see it there,” said
Marion. He later found out through intelligence that it was called
“Operation Marion” because the apartheid government utilised homelands as
puppets in their fight against whoever they considered the enemy at that time. “A marionette is sometimes referred to as a puppet so they dubbed
the KZN operation as “marionette” but they had shortened it to “marion” because
they were puppets being used by the government to fight off the ANC.” WHERE IS MARION NOW? Marion is now running his own forensic investigation firm
where he probes matters related to fraud and other suspected criminal
activities. “I’ve got a few attorneys who hire me to do follow-up
investigations. I take work that just sees me through the day because for 40
years my life was based around police work and investigations from 5 am until
7 pm or later than that, so it can’t change now. I’d go crazy if I just sat and
did nothing.” He has a postgraduate qualification in business management
and has trained with some of the highly respected law enforcement agencies
including the FBI, MI6 and Scotland Yard. When Marion is not busy with his investigative work he
enjoys playing squash and training young people who are interested in the
sport.