The “City of Choice” is a shell of what it could be. This is
the sentiment of DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola, who says this is because
Msunduzi has the financial muscle to compete with the metropolitan
municipalities but a lack of political will to deal with poor revenue
collection and non-compliance with key legislation. Majola recently sat down with Weekend Witness to reflect on
the status of the capital of KwaZulu-Natal. Majola joined the Msunduzi council after the 2016 local
government elections after having spent more than a decade at uMgungundlovu
District. He said one of the things the council had to deal with
immediately, after being inducted, was the issue of the municipal manager as
the term of the then suspended Mxolisi Nkosi expired in December 2016. “We were divided on whether his contract should be renewed.
I’d never dealt with him so the only thing I knew was that he was the
accounting officer when Msunduzi got its clean audit for the 2014/2015
financial team and those who were against the renewal of his contract also
didn’t put forward any proof to warrant their position on letting him go,” said
Majola. As someone who grew up in Pietermaritzburg, Majola said it
saddens him to see his home town being brought to its knees as a result of
deliberate ignorance of key legislation and misconduct. He said no matter how hard the administration works, the
situation will not change until politicians stop interfering with recruitment
and tender processes. “You must remember that we have —more or less — the same
administration team that achieved the clean audit. The only thing that has
changed is the make-up of the council. “Political interference is rife and that, along with the
lack of political stability at City Hall, is translating into poor service
delivery and lack of accountability, and in a few weeks’ time we will be
getting our second disclaimer.” While the DA was pleased that action was finally taken
against suspended City boss Sizwe Hadebe, Majola said the rot remains. He said
there is a belief by “everyone” that Hadebe was used by corrupt politicians to
perpetuate acts of misconduct because he was desperate for the job as he had
resigned under a cloud from Ekurhuleni Municipality in 2014. “The problem is not with Hadebe, so  in as much as we want his matter dealt with,
we are not going to see any change if we still have councillors who refuse to
abide by the law which clearly states that politicians should not influence
recruitment and supply-chain processes.” He said this hinders the administration’s ability to conduct
its duties. As a result, service-delivery projects are halted and millions of
rands in unspent grants are surrendered to the national Treasury at the end of
every financial year. “It’s really embarrassing that we get so much money to spend
on projects that are meant to change people’s lives and we fail to do that so
we end up giving back the money and then have to beg for rollovers, only to
fail to spend the money again in the next financial year.” Since 2016, the DA has refused to approve the City’s budget,
citing that it is unrealistic and fails to contribute towards the development
of the region. “We have a council that prioritises things that are not our
core function so we find ourselves spending millions on things like security
because more than 30% of the councillors are walking around with an army of
bodyguards, yet we’ve never seen a single report from the police intelligence
recommending that they should get personal security because their lives are at
risk.” Majola said one of their gripes is the lack of will to deal
with poor revenue collection across the municipality while the City sits on the
shoulders of those who have paid for rates and services. “Due to the incorrect billing system since July 2017, this
municipality has gone ahead with illegal disconnections. The other injustices
suffered by ratepayers include additional visitation charges, recycling charges
as well as basic water and electricity availability charges just to fill their
depleted coffers.” He said except for the more than 24 000 Vulindlela consumers
who were not billed, Msunduzi lost electricity worth approximately R360 million
between 2015 and 2017. At least R236 million worth of water was lost through
leaks during the same period, which Majola said was exacerbated by the lack of
a plan to deal with ageing infrastructure. As of last week, Msunduzi’s debtors’ book was sitting at
close to R3 billion and the recently launched amnesty campaign is hoped to
clear some of that. However, Majola said he is not too optimistic as some ward
councillors have failed to play their part in the past when it came to
programmes that were geared towards improving the financial status of the City. “These are the same councillors who have failed to get the
poorest of the poor in their wards to register for the indigent programme. I
can assure you that most of the people who make up the R3 billion debtors’ book
qualify as indigents and if they were registered, Msunduzi would be getting a
sizeable chunk of the equitable share from the national Treasury,” said Majola. Equitable share is an unconditional allocation from the
national Treasury which enables municipalities to provide basic services as
well as conduct administrative and governance functions. Majola said he feels sorry for Mayor Themba Njilo as the
irregular decisions made by the ANC-led council are blamed on him, yet it is
obvious that he is leading a divided caucus. Who is Sibongiseni Majola? Sibongiseni Majola joined the Democratic Party in 1997 after
feeling frustrated by what he described as the lack of vision and
transformation within the ANC. The father of four was a party official before being
deployed to serve as a councillor in the uMgungundlovu District in 2002. In
2009, he was appointed as the DA’s caucus leader in the district and in 2011 he
was deployed to serve in Msunduzi while still holding his seat in the district. In 2016, the DA made him its caucus leader in Msunduzi where
he sits on the finance and executive committees. Majola is passionate about economics and has numerous
tertiary qualifications in the field as well as in local government. When he is not fulfilling his role as a “career-politician”,
Majola enjoys watching his favourite soccer teams — AmaZulu and Kaizer
Chiefs — play. He is also a fan of “fast and efficient cars” as he detests
being stuck on the road for long periods. DA’s ‘Rescue Plan’ for Msunduzi The upgrade of the infrastructure department should be the
number-one priority, focusing on appointing qualified engineers and artisans to
departments like water and electricity to alleviate the service-delivery
disruptions and provide better services. The finance department needs to embark on a revenue
enhancement campaign with an advanced meter audit. “Smart” and prepaid meters
need to be installed in wards one to nine, plus 39, in Vulindlela, which are
currently billed on a R104 flat rate against the actual consumption. This area
makes up 40% of the municipality’s population. Ensure financial grants 
received from the provincial and national governments are spent and
managed with financial oversight and legislated time frames. Improvement and focus on the sustainable development and
city enterprises will create a space for opportunities that will attract
investors and will create an environment worth investing in. Improve the community services department by focusing on the
parks and waste departments. Improve and capacitate the traffic enforcement, public
safety and fire departments to develop a safe and secure environment for the
people. Under the corporate services department there is need to
create a transparent and accurate system of recruiting  and to stop appointing unqualified cadres in
non-mandated posts at the expense of critical and priority posts, which are
running at 44% unfilled. Reduce the excessive number of bodyguards.