Momentous artworks collected over the years hang in a
derelict building as continuous neglect threatens to rob Pietermaritzburg of
one of its most treasured sites. This is the concern expressed by art connoisseur and
recently retired Tatham Art Gallery director Brendan Bell, in his recent
interview with Weekend Witness. Bell could not suppress his dejection as he pointed out how
Msunduzi Municipality has over the years failed to maintain the gallery
building and other surrounding historical buildings in the city that belong to
it. “It has always been a battle to try to communicate the value
and importance of the art museum. It is simply not seen as a priority,” he
said. “The roof of this building needs constant maintenance. Over
time, with the rain and the heat, the sunbaked bricks have started crumbling
and they need to be replaced. “This is a national monument building and year after year we
didn’t get funds.” “Political will is diverting funds elsewhere and the gallery
is not the only part of the municipality that is affected,” he added. Bell, who retired at the end of September, was at the helm
of the Tatham Art Gallery, one of seven major art museums in South Africa. “The future is anybody’s guess. There’s an underlying
sadness at the thought of what could possibly happen, which I’ve seen at other
institutions similar to this,” said Bell reflecting on his many years’ service
to the gallery. Originally from Durban, Bell, an artist in his own right,
was drawn to art from a young age. “I had a wonderful art teacher at school and I got very
involved. I enjoyed being creative, and also knowing more about the history of
art and how things developed, ignited my love for the arts,” he recalled. A fine arts degree and an education diploma resulted in him
teaching art and English at Eshowe High School, and then at Maritzburg College. Being a teacher, Bell found his first art job as an
educational officer at the Tatham Art Gallery in 1982, a position he held for
five years. “The work gave me scope to broaden my knowledge and
experience of art history and education practice,” he told Weekend Witness. But during his tenure as education officer, he was head
hunted in 1986 by the Johannesburg Art Gallery to design and implement its
education programmes, a post he held for some two and a half years.  ‘It was a case of saying, let us not just collect but look at why we collect.’ A series of field trips, during which Tatham staff travelled the length and breadth of the province to meet master crafters, yielded among others, these works that were accessioned by the gallery with Brendan Bell at the helm. Top left: Widas Mtshali’s dog made from wood with a burn pattern and (top right) button-and-wire chandelier by Usisi Designs. Below from left: an embroided Ottoman made by Tunga Embroidery Group from Hluhluwe, Beauty Ngxongo’s two-lidded grass baskets and three glass perfume bottles made by Guido and Coralie van Besouw. Photos: Tatham Art Gallery He cited the period he spent in Johannesburg as one of the
most important phases in his career, particularly being involved with the
Neglected Tradition Exhibition at the Johannesburg Art Gallery in late 1988 and
early 1989. “While I wasn’t in charge of the project, I certainly helped
with the documentation side of it, particularly the extensive bibliography that
went with the catalogue.” Bell said that during that time he was also involved in
training a group of volunteer guides who took groups and individuals around art
displays at the gallery. With limited opportunity for advancement in the art museum
world, in 1989, Bell and his wife Jenny took a leap of faith and joined a
family pig farming business in the Eastern Cape. “The art world in South Africa is very small, particularly
in the museums. It got to a point where there wasn’t much room for advancement. “We were asked by my wife’s family to go down to the Eastern
Cape where they owned a pig farm, and we took a walk on the wild side.” Due to financial constraints in the farming business, in
1990, Bell found himself back in Pietermaritzburg where he again taught at
Maritzburg College for 18 months, before finally returning to art work. As fate would have it, in 1991, his predecessor Lorna
Ferguson resigned as director and Bell was asked to apply for the post. “For personal reasons I declined, but couldn’t ignore my
fate when a few months later the post again became available. It seemed like
fate or God was calling and I eventually took the job.” After 27 years, he has been the longest-serving director of
the gallery. “I love this gallery and I find the collection very
interesting. “Each successive director adds his or her stamp on how the
permanent collection is consolidated and expanded, within the framework of an
acquisition policy.” Bell said he worked with a focused acquisition policy,
devised originally by Valerie Leigh, who was curator of the Tatham Art Gallery
from 1967 to 1974. The gallery was started in 1903 and initially it comprised
Victorian artworks. OPENING UP THE GALLERY POST-COLONIAL TIMES As the winds of change blew over South Africa, signalling an
end to the apartheid era, art museums, which had previously sidelined African
artists, were challenged to make their acquisition policies inclusive. Bell said inclusivity implied not only racial representation
but breaking down barriers between traditional Western notions of high art and
craft, consciously embracing a fluid African aesthetic. This in turn led to accepting that traditional material
cultural artefacts such as Zulu clay vessels and beadwork could no longer be
marginalised as items of material culture only. “I think it was only in the eighties that the first works by
a black artist came into the collection,” he said. The first black artists’ work acquired by the gallery under
his curatorship was from the Rorke’s Drift Art and Craft Centre outside Dundee. “The inclusion of African art in the museum’s collection has
immeasurably enriched both the gallery and South Africa’s heritage.” Bell said the gallery’s inclusive acquisition policy in turn
influenced how they displayed art works from the permanent collection. “The collection has grown in a very logical and considered
way. It’s not just been haphazard. “It was a case of saying, let us not just collect but look
at why we collect.” MARRYING THE PAST AND THE PRESENT Bell explained that the displays at the Tatham Art Gallery
are a deliberate political statement, and somewhat different from what one
normally finds at art museums. “It became evident to me in 1994 that art museums were
taking all the colonial works and putting them in the storage and only had
South African art on display. That didn’t make sense to me. How can you
understand your present if you don’t know your past?” he said. He said he ensured that the displays were a combination of
works from different times, geographical spaces and from different cultures. “You want your artworks to begin these conversations about
where we came from and where we are going. That to me makes perfect sense. It’s
our way of making society accepting of difference and similarity, and how we
treasure the common things we have,” he said. “For better or worse, if we don’t think about it or discuss
it, we are not going to move forward.” BREAKING DOWN BARRIERS BETWEEN HIGH ART AND CRAFTS In a bid to bring crafters to the forefront of art, in 2010,
Bell curated a craft exhibition titled Meeting the Makers, to break down
differences between high-end art and craft. Bell and his team spent six months travelling KwaZulu-Natal
in search of crafters who displayed a contemporary vision. He explained that the exhibition, part of which included the
release of a book about the exhibit, was more about the people than the
objects. “We travelled all over KZN on field trips and a lot of the
works we acquired are now in the Tatham Art Gallery collection,” he said
pointing to some of the art pieces at Café Tatham. While there have been several acquisitions made to the
gallery’s collection under his directorship, Bell said it is difficult to
single out any art work as his favourite. “I have a bit of a maverick, off-beat taste, I can think of
lots of little works that really grab me, that have been acquired during my
time as director, which I feel add hugely to the collection, but on a slightly
different level.” LOWLIGHTS While his tenure as director has been decorated with many
highlights, Bell admitted that there were a fair share of lowlights as well.
The most recent being the flooding of the gallery last May, which caused damage
to hundreds of artworks that were stored in the basement of the building. The flooding was a result of a revolt by Msunduzi’s workers
who switched off the power in an act of sabotage during a protest, resulting in
the underground river pump failing to activate. “The room was flooded with half a metre of water that left
400 artworks damaged, which are still in the process of being sorted out.
Another 10 artworks were permanently destroyed,” he said. “That was a big challenge for us. A lot of artworks on paper
were damaged and they have been sent in batches to Cape Town to be restored.” Bell, however, said that since the incident, a generator has
been installed in the building to ensure that the flooding doesn’t happen
again. Another ongoing challenge, he said has been negotiating
tirelessly to ensure that the gallery is not moved to provincial museum
services. “This museum has always been intimately linked with the
municipality; it’s part of it. And recently, politicians in the council have
wanted to give the art gallery to province.” “I was absolutely stunned when that suggestion was made. The
gallery was never part of the province. The suggestion indicates ignorance of
where the gallery comes from and its importance to the people of this area.” Bell said while the gallery receives a small subsidy from
the provincial museum services, it has certainly never belonged to them. “It was nonsense but they will keep trying because the
political will is not there,” he said. REFLECTING ON THE VISUAL ARTS LANDSCAPE  IN SOUTH
AFRICA Commenting on the visual arts landscape in South Africa,
Bell said that in recent years, a lot of the contemporary art production has
become self-indulgent. “It’s very self-conscious in its sociopolitical intentions.
I feel often that, particularly, commercial art galleries run on this hype of
sociopolitical commentary. Youngsters get taken a bit off course.” He said it is a “tragedy” that art is dying in the rural
areas. “It saddens me that our reliance on technology and social
media, and our aspirations as South Africans are for material gain but not for
creativity. Unless it’s based around technology, it’s kind of dying.” RETIREMENT PLANS Although it will not be an easy transition, Bell said he
will focus more on his craft and home management, to take the burden off his
wife who has a demanding job. “I’ve also been advised just to take it easy,” he quipped,
adding he is looking forward to an overdue trip planned to Antarctica this
month. “Knowingly and unknowingly, I’ve given up on other aspects
of my life. I’m proud of what the gallery has become but it has to sail on its
own.” Although Bell’s successor has not been appointed, he advised
that whoever is hired to fill his shoes to know the permanent collection and
look after it. In the interim, Bryony Clark, the assistant director, is
steering the ship.  Thanks to Ada Susan Tatham, who started it all According to the Tatham Art Gallery website, the gallery
owes its origins to Ada Susan Tatham, who in early 1903 collected money
donations  from friends who were
interested in the formation of an art gallery, and from the city council, and
travelled overseas to acquire art works. Ada Tatham was wife of the then judge president of Natal,
and the gallery was named after her. In England, she contacted her husband’s cousin, the
president of the Royal Academy, and met other Royal academicians. With their help and their interest in the founding of an art
gallery in an English colony, Tatham managed to acquire paintings of a value in
excess of what she had to spend. In addition, she arranged for the loan of a large collection
of paintings to be shipped out to the colony, and Pietermaritzburg citizens
were encouraged to select and donate a work from this exhibition. “It’s interesting that she felt Maritzburg needed a collection
which could be added for enjoyment and largely for education purposes,” said
Brendan Bell. “That is something that has always stuck with me, coming
from an education background. “It was very important that she had similar ideas; that is
why we have stuck with the policy ever since, making only minor adjustments,”
he said.  The artworks pictured are three of the first acquisitions made to the gallery’s permanent collection in 1992 under Bell’s directorship. Artwork 1: One of the threads in our inclusive acquisitions policy has been how artists from different cultures view the ‘other’. This etching by Willem Hermanus Coetzer is a case in point. The tondo format and mother-and-child subject was often used by Italian Renaissance artists. In this depiction Coetzer’s mother and child are African, set in a ‘classical’ rural South African setting. Artwork 2: The autobiographical sculpture by Samson Mudzunga represents a shift in the gallery’s acquisitions policy, echoing a postmodernist reaction to the theory and practice of modernism. Postmodernism refuses to recognise the authority of a single style or definition of what art should be. Mudzunga’s Wheelbarrow challenges us to reflect on our perceptions of art in society. Artwork 3: SA artist Frank Graham Bell was a founder member of the London-based Euston Road group, which promoted a move away from avant-garde styles to a ‘realism’ derived from the work of Cézanne. In many ways, Bell’s painting of Lyttleton Airfield suggests developments in European Modernism reflected in the gallery’s core collection. 