The darker side of the exotic pet trade is a growing concern. Experts have warned that the widespread use of the Internet
has made it easier than ever to “order” or purchase a wild animal without
clarification as to where it has come from or how it should be cared for. In Pietermaritzburg, hedgehogs, chinchillas, and slippery
non-venomous snakes are some of the exotic pets that families are bringing into
their homes. Steve Smit, co-founder of Monkey Helpline, said most wild
animals are gregarious, and live in pairs or small groups, and yet in captivity
they are often kept as individuals in unsuitable conditions. “Very few people have the inclination or the ability to take
proper care of the animal that they’ve got. As a result you have huge numbers
of these animals with rescue individuals or organisations often in very poor
health,” he said. “The fact is that animals are not commodities. They
shouldn’t be kept as pets, exotic animals tend to be fad animals. Once people
realise that they are not suitable as pets, they neglect them,” said Smit. He said the animals become morbid and end up dying from
depression. “It’s just a money making thing. When people buy animals as
pets, it breaks down the inherent value that they have, they are seen only in
terms of their monetary value or status value. They are not respected for who
they are,” he said. Martie Rossouw, manager of the wildlife unit at the National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, said: “Our biggest concern is
for the welfare of these animals. Most often these animals are bought on a whim
and their owners have no idea how to care for them. Wild animals are highly
sensitive to stress.” She said an incorrect diet, handling and husbandry by
inexperienced, ignorant owners often led to the animals’ welfare and mental and
physical well-being being severely compromised.  Rossouw said exotic animals were not easy to keep as they
come from parts of the world where their natural environment is very different
from South Africa. “Housing for exotic animals should simulate the natural
environment as much as possible. Animals suffer when they are kept in
conditions that are significantly different from their natural environment,”
she said. “Many people buy baby exotic animals without knowing how big
they will grow. For instance, a rock python can grow up to five metres, an
iguana up to 1,5 metres and a baby terrapin can grow from a tiny 2,5 cm to over
30 cm,” she said, adding that some of the animals were poisonous and can be
very aggressive. “Exotic animals can carry dangerous diseases which can be
transmitted to man,” she said. The CEO of the Captured Africa Foundation, Drew Abrahamson,
said the growing acceptance of people living with exotic and wild animals was
symptomatic of the country’s lack of capacity to effectively deal with wild
animal populations. “There are more than 8 000 lions in captivity in this
country alone. The 270 breeding farms form part of this figure as well as
animal sanctuaries and other conservation facilities. There are only a handful
of good sanctuaries and they only get issued with permits for a limited number
of lions and, unfortunately, they can’t go over that limit.” Keeping wild animals as pets poses a danger to humans. “Wild cats have so many parasites that can make you gravely
ill. They are often riddled with worms, so if you take your kids to go and pet
cubs, they run a heavy risk of contracting tapeworms that can burrow into your
intestines and literally eat you from the inside out.”  Smaragda Louw, of animal rights lobby group Ban Animal
Trading, said the scale at which wild animals from South Africa were being sold
locally and overseas was threatening several endangered and indigenous animals. She said South Africa was the largest exporter of exotic
animals such as the African Grey parrot and was known as a source of lion cubs
for other African countries, such as Libya. In January, The Witness reported that a man was caught in
Pietermaritzburg, allegedly trying to sell one of the world’s most endangered
animals, a pangolin. The pangolin, which was found in a backpack, later died at
the Johannesburg vet, after severe suffering. Police said the man allegedly intended to sell the 8,9 kg
adult pangolin for about R85 000. Pangolins are widely considered to be the most trafficked
mammal in the world, and their sale is illegal. In March, Traveller24 reported that the European Union (EU)
is a major destination for illegally smuggled live lizards, snakes, and
tortoises from southern Africa. Wealthy EU citizens are big collectors of rare reptiles,
with one tortoise openly offered for sale at R35 000. The traders, mainly from
Germany, Slovenia and Russia, create special online platforms and Facebook
groups with the physical hand-over mostly done at European reptile trade shows
such as the exhibition that was held in Hamm, Germany. Sandra Altherr, a biologist at Pro Wildlife specialising in
small reptiles, told Traveller24 some dealers prefer not to have dedicated
stands at the fair, since the fair prohibits the sale of venomous snakes, so
they rather exchange the reptiles carried in their backpacks in nearby hotels. Paris police find lion cub in Lamborghini A lion cub was found in a flashy car on the Champs-Elysees
in Paris on Monday evening, a police source said, the latest incident of the
fluffy-but-fierce animal apparently being kept as a pet. The baby lion was discovered inside a hired Lamborghini
during a police search on the busy luxury shopping street, according to the
source, confirming earlier media reports.  The driver was taken into custody and the cub was being
looked after, they said. Last month, a six-week-old lion cub was seized from an
apartment in a Paris suburb and the owner sentenced to six months in prison. During that trial, the prosecutor said the discovery was not
an isolated case and investigations were already under way into three other
baby lions kept on the outskirts of the capital. In a separate incident also in October, a tiny lion cub
weighing just a few kilos was found in a car garage in the southern French city
of Marseille. That cub, a female believed to be between one and two months
old, has been passed on to a specialist NGO which works to shelter wild
animals. Thrill of owning exotic pets Joanne Trollip from Doolittle Exotic Pets in Clarendon, said
exotic pet owners are always looking for something odd, unusual and slightly
dangerous. For them it’s the thrill of being close to an animal that belongs in
the wild. Doolittle Exotic Pets stocks snakes, marine fish, rabbits,
hamsters, guinea pigs, leopard geckos and tarantula spiders. While there are favourites, Trollip said these are linked to
trends. “It goes through periods,” she said. “You’ll have one week where it will be snakes and we’ll sell
snakes for the next week or two. And then it will be hamsters. They all are
favourites but it just goes through stages. Trollip said they went through a stage where lots of people
wanted African pygmy hedgehogs. “The African pygmy hedgehogs don’t make the best pets
because they are spiky and hard to handle,” said Trollip. Classifieds site Gumtree had over 20 adverts for the sale of
chinchillas on Thursday. Prices ranged from R450 to R5 000. Brett Cooper, owner of Butterflies for Africa, said the
chinchillas, from Mexico, need to be kept in a fairly cool environment. “We keep them separate from the rest of the butterfly
enclosure because it’s too hot for them there. They’ve become fairly popular,
but they are not really suited to the South African climate. They have the
thickest fur of any mammal and they are unable to sweat and they can’t get
wet.” Cooper said it was dangerous for chinchillas to be exposed
to high heat. “They are also nocturnal like the hedgehogs. Hedgehogs and
tenrecs are extremely cute but the problem is you can’t buy them as pets
because they are extremely spiky. You can’t pick them up and hold them very
easily,” he said. Trollip, who co-owns Doolittles Exotic Pets with her husband
Jacques, said she has always loved exotic animals. She grew up on a farm in
northern KZN, where she hand-raised baby birds, and had rabbits and hamsters. “I’ve always loved taking care of animals, and learning
about them is great. I think people who want to own these animals have to be
dedicated to them as they require extra care. If you buy a pet, understand the
responsibility, and get the right equipment to look after it,” she said.  Trollip said milk and corn snakes were ideal for first time
snake pet owners. “A lot of people like the ball pythons as well because they
are quite easy to handle. There are a lot of snakes on the invasive species
list that we are not allowed to sell and we stay away from those,” she said. Depending on the type, the sex, the colouring and age, the
corn snakes sell for R200 upwards and the milk snakes between R500 to R800. The two main hamsters are the Russian dwarf hamster and the
Syrian hamster, which includes the Teddy Bear hamster. Doolittle Exotic Pets also keep a wide range of freshwater
tropical fish, and marine fish, which are imported from the Far East. Safiya Mohamed, owner of Exotic Pets on Victoria Road, said
while she now only keeps rodents and birds, she is often bombarded with
requests for Iguanas, turtles, exotic frogs and spiders. “The pet trade industry is not as it used to be. The rules
are stricter and we are not allowed to keep some of these animals in store. It
affected my business drastically and we now only keep birds and hamsters,” she
said. Mohamed said the African Grey, selling for R3 000 to R3 500
remained a favourite with bird enthusiasts. “People love African Greys because they consider them to be
lifelong companions. They can live for up to 70 years,” she said. “When you have them, it’s like you have a child in your
house,” said Mohamed. According to the Lafeber Veterinarians website, much of the
Grey’s appeal comes from its talking ability. It is among the best talkers in the parrot family, able to
repeat words and phrases after hearing them just once or twice. This bird
reaches full talking ability at around a year of age, and most become capable
mimics much earlier. Not only will a Grey develop an outstanding vocabulary,
research has shown that this species can come to understand what it’s saying. Mohamed said budgies, selling at R75 each, were the
preferred option for bird novices because they are easy to breed. Do you need a permit? According to the Endangered Wildlife Trust, exotic animals
may only be obtained from reputable, legal outlets and private dealers. Important questions to ask before purchasing your pet
include: • Where did the animal come from? • Are copies of the required permits for import into the
province and conveying within the province available? • Do you need permits to keep the animal? If answers to
these questions are not adequate this should raise alarm bells about the
legality of the transactions. Do you need a permit to keep exotic animals as pets? In certain provinces permits are required to keep exotic
animals as pets. Conservation issues are regulated mainly by the relevant
provinces’ bylaws and ordinances. In Gauteng, North West, Mpumalanga and Limpopo no permit is
required for the legal possession or conservation of an exotic animal. However,
any import, export or transport of an exotic wild animal in any of the nine
provinces requires a permit. Ownership and conservation permits, permits to buy
or sell exotic animals, as well as import and export permits are required in
the Northern, Eastern and Western Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Free State.