Salary earners are battling to make ends meet. Each month many of them have to borrow money from loan
sharks at exorbitant interest rates, and they battle to pay back these loans and
keep their heads above water. Debt-review companies say more people are coming to them
than ever before. South Africa’s economic climate is at its lowest ebb since
the recession back in 2008, and this has seriously affected the cost of living
for consumers. Many citizens are finding it harder to balance their
day-to-day expenses. Steep fuel price increases, and the knock-on effect of
these, and tax increases have hit consumers hard. Public transport hikes have impacted predominantly the
middle to lower-earning classes. According to a Statistics SA 2017 report, the number of
people living in poverty increased to nearly 14 million in the past five years
as about half of South Africa survives on less than R992 per month. The October 2018 Household Affordability Index report,
compiled by the Pietermaritzburg Economic Justice and Dignity Group
non-governmental organisation, shows the cost of nutritious diet foods in a
household food basket is R4 085,12 for seven family members, and R2 337,18 for
four family members. But the average wage for black South African households is
R3 000.  Pay your bills first to maintain a good credit rating Dheran Ghela (pictured below), a local financial adviser, said the
economy is not in good shape.  “The petrol price is at an all-time high. This impacts
further down the chain in terms of price of basic needs of the people. Food prices have increased, thereby shrinking the budget of
everyone from the person in the street to the affluent. The bottom line is that surplus cash has been seriously
reduced, affecting the spending patterns of everyone.” Ghela advised those who are struggling to make ends meet,
despite earning a salary, to try by all means to keep a good credit rating.
“Pay your bills first and on time. It is important to keep a good credit rating
today as this affects every aspect of our lives from short-term insurance to
negotiating credit. “If you are struggling with meeting repayments, approach
your creditor first before you fall behind. Renegotiate your payment plan.
Think before you enter any credit agreements, get a second opinion. Speak to
your financial adviser to help you restructure your commitments,” he said. For those stuck in the pattern of taking out a loan every
month to get by, Ghela said this is unfortunately a massive problem with no
“one size fits all” solution, but he advises people to seek professional
financial assistance. When creating a monthly budget, Ghela said people should
list their regular commitments that they need to meet every month and know the
dates that the payments have to be made. “Have a critical look at your expenditure. What can be
eliminated that is not a necessity? After about three months, you will know
what surplus is available. Rather save towards a purchase than use credit cards
or loans,” he said. Ghela said it is the little simple actions like making your
lunch at home and taking it to work, rather buying lunch every day, that will
save you money. “Try to shop once, as going to the shop every day is costly in
terms of petrol and buying unnecessary items.” Taking out loans for survival Ndumiso Mngadi, a local loan shark, told Weekend Witness
that despite his 50% interest rate, people are still “desperate” enough to
borrow money from him. Mngadi said he expects his money to be paid back to him the
following month. If his clients cannot pay back the full amount they
borrowed, including the interest, he accepts the interest on its own, until
they can pay the money, which he reckons is sometimes very hard for his
clients. “There is a woman, who I know earns between R60 000 to
R70 000 per month.  She borrowed R10 000
from me at the beginning of the year and she’s been paying me R5 000 every
month. She’s supposed to pay me R15 000 to settle the loan, but she can’t and
as much as I see that it’s really tough for her, I can’t be lenient as I also
need the money to support my family,” he said. Another local loan shark, who asked not to be named, said
most of his clients are employed people with proper paying jobs. “My clients
are mostly nurses, police officers and teachers. Most of them live on loans.
Month after month they pay up their loan and immediately take out another one. “It’s scary to see how poor people are and how much they are
struggling,” he said. There is nothing left after pay day A 30-year-old Ashdown woman who works as a sales assistant
at a local company told Weekend Witness that her family has had to cut back on
many things to make it through the month. The woman, who asked not to be named, said she lives with
her husband and two children, aged four and seven years old. They pay about R3 500 for rent on a two-bedroom house, spend
around R2 000 to R2 400 on groceries every month, they are paying off two cars,
the children’s school fees and also have to make financial contributions to
both their families. “We have had to make very tough financial decisions and
sacrifices to survive until the next pay day. Last year we decided to cut down
on everything, including the money we spend on groceries so that we could pay
off all the debts we had accumulated in our 20s. “Thursdays used to be our movie nights, but that had to come
to an end. We would spend almost R1 000 in one night just for a movie, snacks
and dinner. I can’t even remember the last time I went out for a movie but we
had to make those choices to get our finances on track,” she said. The woman said they also decided to take their eldest son to
a township school rather than a multiracial school as that was much more
affordable for them. “We are also considering buying a house next year after we
realised that we could actually use the money we are currently paying for rent
to pay our bond,” she said.  Kyle Govindsamy (26), a candidate attorney serving his
articles at a local law firm, said his finances are in “disarray”. “I actually used to have more money when I was unemployed
compared to now,” he said. Govindsamy said he earns a salary of just over R10 000 and
recently bought a new car. “The instalments for my car take half my salary and I spend
a lot of money on petrol, but I really need the car as I start work very early
and leave the office late. I’m still living at home and have to make financial
contributions as an adult. “I’m the eldest child of four boys at home so I also need to
tend to my siblings’ needs. I have clothing store accounts that chow all my
money. I can hardly get through the month and never have money to spoil myself
for working so hard. It’s tough,” he said. A harsh Christmas With the festive season creeping up, chief executive officer
of the Intelligent Debt Management Group (IDM) Ian Wason said consumers are
likely to tighten their belts a lot sooner than usual in the season due to the
increased economic and financial hurdle­s faced by South Africans this year. He said the value-added tax (VAT)  increase that took effect in April this year,
coupled with South Africa slumping into a recession a few months later, as well
as continuous fuel increases, are taking their toll on consumers. Wason said IDM, which comprises two national debt
counsellors — DebtBusters and Consumer Debt Help — has seen an increase of
inquiries for debt assistance over the past three months. “From September this year, we’ve been experiencing an
unusual spike in debt-management inquiries, up to 20% more than last year this
time,” he said. He said even though retailers are alread­y gearing up to
showcase their festive campaigns, consumers are turning to debt-management
services for help, and this could impact retail spend significantly. “We are used to seeing a spike in debt-assistance inquiries
after the festive season, but the spike has come prematurely this year.” He urged people not to become “desensitised” to their
personal finance­s during the heavy-spending festive season. “To avoid the end-of-year and especially New Year money
blues, it is important for consumers to take the appropriate measures in order
to remain in control of their finances,” said Wason.  Track your spending by month HOW TO DO YOUR BUDGET The first thing you’ll need to get a grasp of is how much
money you’re actually bringing in every month. Deduct factors such as income
tax, pension plan contributions, and other things that are docked from your
pay. These include things such as your mortgage, car payments,
student loans, and so forth. These expenses remain relatively constant month
after month. Variable expenses are those that either only pop up every few
months, or fluctuate in cost month to month such as entertainment, groceries,
and so on. It’s a good idea to put some money aside every month — no
matter how little — towards your savings account. Financial experts typically recommend setting about 10% of
your post-tax income aside for your savings, although the more you can put away
the better. You might opt to have a portion of your money transferred out of
your checking account and into your savings account automatically each month so
you don’t have the excuse of “forgetting” to put that portion aside. Retaining all your receipts for all your expenditure will
help you determine how much you’re actually spending every month. After two or three months of adding these totals up, you’ll
have a good idea of the average amount of money that is going towards expenses,
and determine whether you need to cut back on spending or not. Setting specific goals can help you pay off any outstanding
debt you have, which can eventually free up your finances at some point down
the line. Short-term goals can include things such as paying down credit cards,
while long-term goals may include paying off your mortgage. Putting a budget together requires a resource that helps you
organise your finances. By using a budgeting tool, such as a simple monthly
budget template on an Excel spreadsheet, you can easily tally up your income,
expenses, and figure out the difference between the two after all factors have
been considered and identified. You’ll be able to see if you’ve still got money left over,
or if you’re digging yourself into a financial hole. — mint.com 