A traditional healer killed a teenager, buried him and then dug up the body to cut it up so that he could get more “healing powers”. Sibusiso Ngidi (34) and his assistant Khanyisile Khusi (46) on Monday pleaded guilty in the Pietermaritzburg high court to the murder of Mxolisi Langazana in May last year. The short chubby man told the court through his attorney that he has been a traditional healer since 2003. A few years ago he felt he was losing his healing powers and approached another healer, whom he referred to only as Temba, for assistance. This man helped Ngidi get clients. Temba told him last year that if he wanted to be powerful and to succeed, he should kill a person. Ngidi then enlisted Khusi, his wife and two girlfriends to find someone to kill. The target chosen was Langazana, who frequently visited him at his homestead. Ngidi added that he and the four women planned to hang the unsuspecting teenager. On the day of the murder they all, including Langazana, consumed “Smirnoff and 12 bottles of Black Label beer”. “I made a rope with a hook and tied it to the upper part of my double storey rondavel,” he said. At 2 am, he told Langazana that he wanted to play a game with him. “I told him to place the rope over his neck and as soon as he felt the rope tightening on him I would release the rope,” said Ngidi. Thinking it was a joke, Langazana did as he was told. Ngidi and his assistants then pulled the rope. One of them cut off Langazana’s head and placed it in a clay pot. “We thereafter placed the remainder of all the body parts in a washing basin and covered it with a metal sheet. We then dug a hole and buried the body,” he said. A few months later, they dug up the body and chopped it up and “ground” some of the remains. The body parts were placed in a pot and covered with a table cloth. “I believe that these actions had made me more powerful for my activities as a traditional healer,” he said. Ngidi said Temba then contacted him and asked for the remaining body parts. He wrapped them up in a cloth and was arrested on the way to Temba’s house. Khusi confirmed the details in her guilty plea. No one else has been arrested. Sentencing takes place on Tuesday.