Coffeeberry Cafe was named Small Business of the Year 2018 in the retail category, at Pietermaritzburg Chamber of Business’ (PCB) annual awards evening on Friday. Originally opened in the mall itself, Coffeeberry took the opportunity when the mall was revamped to move to a new location in the courtyard, that gave it the “pavement café” feel. The new-look shop has continued to grow its customer base, PCB CEO Melanie Veness said. The Small Business of the Year 2018 in the services category was awarded to Akeso Clinic, Pietermaritzburg. Akeso Clinic, opened in March 2010, is one of two psychiatric facilities in the city. Admissions have grown each year and it now has 58 beds with 1 315 patient admissions in 2018, with 398 of these being out-of-town patients. An adolescent unit is planned. Pressure Die Castings, arguably the largest brass foundry in the country, was named Business of the Year in the manufacturing sector. Major capital developments are in place to move into other product lines, and new technology has enabled it to reduce its level of reject product considerably. The Business of the Year in the Retail/Professional Services Sector 2018 is Ikatane Trading 47, trading as Capitol Caterers. This business was launched in 1992 with four catering contracts. Twenty-five years later they have over 100 contracts in Pietermaritzburg in the education, health, commercial and retirement sectors through offices in Durban, Johannesburg, Cape Town and Port Elizabeth as well as their base of Pietermaritzburg. Umgeni Water was named Business of theYear — state-owned enterprises. The Medium Business of the Year 2018 is Brink Towing Systems, which designs and manufactures vehicle towbars. The Franchise of the Year 2018 is HBF Group Consultants trading as PSG Employee Benefits Midlands. The company operates from its head office in Pietermaritzburg with marketing offices in Durban, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth and Johannesburg. Praveshen Naidoo of E-Waste Africa was named Champion Entrepreneur 2018. Five years ago Naidoo, an electro-mechanical engineer, conceptualised an environmentally-ethical lightbulb recycling venture. The Wildlife and Environment Society of South Africa was named Social Enterprise of the Year 2018.