KwaZulu-Natal has won the bid to host the 2020 World Football Summit, which is expected to inject R800 million to the province’s economy. It will be the first time that the prestigious event, which brings together the most influential professionals in football, will be held on the African continent. The event will be held in Durban, which was chosen from among a group of other global powerhouses, including Hong Kong in China, Buenos Aires in Argentina and Canada. Making the announcement on Tuesday, Economic Development MEC Sihle Zik­alala said the event will be the biggest event after the 2010 Fifa World Cup. “World Football Summit is the international event of football industry, gathering the most influential professionals in order to discuss the most relevant topics and generate business opportunities. It brings together 80 countries, 2 300 attendees, 90 speakers, 160 clubs, 70% [of] executives, 100 media — with an estimated economic impact of about R800 million. “We will in the next few months work with different stakeholders ... to ensure that we maximise the impact of this mighty summit which has to leave a visible legacy in our sporting sector,” he said. Zikalala said KZN would also host seven major conferences over the next 10 months, which will generate close to R500 million for the province. Most of these events, which include the 70th Annual Meeting of the International Society of Electrochemistry, World Congress on Drowning Prevention and the Meetings of the Parties (MoP7), would be held in Durban. Zikalala said Durban remained the province’s economic hub hence all the major events were being held in Durban. Smaller towns such as Empangeni (which hosted the Pan African Health Tourism Congress), Ilembe and Newcastle have hosted some international events, Zikalala said. Chief executive officer of Tourism KZN, Phindile Makwakwa, said although they try to spread events across the province, issues such as bed availability meant bigger events would be held in Durban.