A brazen armed robbery outside a Scottsville pre-school on Wednesday was caught on CCTV. Scottsville community WhatsApp groups were abuzz on Wednesday morning with news that armed robbers fired two shots just outside a pre-school following the robbery. The groups said the robbers stole three cellphones before they drove off, firing two shots. However, the principal of the school who witnessed the robbery said although there had been a gun involved, no shots were fired. She asked not to be named. Describing the sequence of events, she said a mother had stopped her bakkie a little way down the road, locked it and walked her son into the school. “She had four builders [in] the back of the bakkie,” said the principal. “I was standing by the gate so I could see what was going on. “I saw a silver car pull up almost in front of the school before quickly reversing back down the road. “The car had a red learner’s sticker on the back and there were three men inside. I saw the car stop and a man with a very big knife jumped out the back and approached the builders in the back of the bakkie.” She said he stole three of the four men’s cellphones. The fourth builder jumped from the bakkie and ran to the safety of the school. She said the knifeman climbed back into the car. One of the occupants pointed a firearm high out of his window as they sped down the road. “He did not shoot,” said the principal. She said luckily the children were none the wiser about what was going on and that the rest of the day was business as usual. “The incident occurred at around 7.10 am and police responded really quickly. “I am very thankful,” she said. She urged parents to always be cautious and aware of their surroundings when dropping and fetching their children from school. “Lock your cars, be sure you know what is going on around you and take your valuables with you,” she said. Alexandra police station spokesperson Captain Kholeka Mhlongo had not responded to a request for comment by the time of going to print last night.