Gogo Thoko Khoza (70) of KwaCaluza in Pietermaritzburg has
been inconsolable since she learned about the gruesome death of her two
daughters and five grandchildren, who were found buried inside a house in
Vlakfontein, Johannesburg, earlier this week. On Thursday Khoza told mourners who visited her — including
councillor Nelisiwe Ndlovu and Msunduzi Mayor Themba Njilo — that she knew
something was wrong when she couldn’t get hold of either of her daughters on
the phone last week. The decomposing bodies of Khoza’s daughters, Mbali and Dudu,
were found buried under a pile of sand in their Vlakfontein home earlier this
week. Dudu’s three children — Nomfundo, Luyanda and Sibongakonke —
and Nomfundo’s children Karabo (11) and Nkanyiso (2), were also found in shallow
graves in the house. It appears that Mbali and Dudu were killed sometime last
week, followed by the children, with Nomfundo likely to have been the last to
have been killed on Saturday or Sunday. Police have one man in custody, but the prime suspect in the
murders is a man Gogo Khoza’s family had taken in as one of their own, Sibusiso
Khoza. The gathered family members said on Thursday they never thought that he
would turn out to be the man police are now looking for.  Mbali and Dudu Khoza Gogo Khoza stared blankly at their neatly folded clothes
next to her every time she mentioned them. “I will never be able [to] find peace without my children
and grandchildren but I’m begging the police to find those who did this … “Mbali did everything to support her family but she didn’t know
that the boy who claimed to be a Khoza was also a snake.”  From left: Nomfundo with Karabo and Luyanda Khoza. Nkanyiso and Sibongakonke Khoza. Khoza said she last spoke to Nomfundo, who was a primary
school teacher, on Saturday and she also called Sibusiso to find out when he
had last seen her daughters as she had been unable to get hold of them. “He said they were sleeping but he knew that they were
already in a grave,” she said tearfully. The police are searching for Sibusiso Khoza, who was
welcomed into the Khoza family in 2015 when he introduced himself as a
long-lost child of Gogo’s late son, Mandla.  Sibusiso Earnest Khoza is the prime suspect in the murders. Mbali and Dudu reportedly took him under their wing after
hearing his story about how he had supposedly grown up in a Cape Town
children’s home after his mother died. The pair went as far as ensuring that he obtained an
identity document with the Khoza surname and they bought him clothes. He moved
in with them at the Vlakfontein home earlier this year and was financially
dependent on Mbali, who was a Spar manager, and Dudu. Mandla’s daughter, Jabu Khoza, said: “Mbali and Dudu are my cousins
but they were more my sisters because I never had any siblings. I could go to
them with any problem and they would help me because they always wanted to make
sure that I was okay. “They opened their hearts to Sibusiso because they believed
that he was family and they always took care of anyone that was family.” She said she had never met Sibusiso as he rarely visited
KwaCaluza. Another family member, Sinenhlanhla Khoza — who regulary
interacted with Sibusiso after he had promised to help her find a job — said
she suspected that she had narrowly escaped being lured to her grave. “He kept calling me asking when I would be coming to
Vlakfontein and then he told me he had arranged a job interview so I must come.
I was meant to go there this week,” she said. She described him as a master con artist who had convinced
the family that he had a medical degree and they all supported him while he was
unemployed until he claimed to have found a job as a general practitioner at
Johannesburg’s Charlotte Maxeke Hospital. “At this point I’m not sure if he was even a real doctor or
that he was working there … We are pleading with him to hand himself to the
police and tell them the truth about what happened. It’s the least he could do
for the family that he claimed to love,” said Sinenhlanhla. The Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal provincial governments have
committed to assist with the funeral arrangements so that the Khozas can be
buried on Sunday. Mayor Njilo told the family that the bodies would be
arriving in Pietermaritzburg from Johannesburg on Saturday but they would be
kept at the state morgue instead of going to KwaCaluza overnight as would be
the tradition. “They are in a bad condition because they were already
decomposing when they were discovered so they can’t spend a night here,” he
said.