July 6, 2014 will forever be etched in her memory. It was the day she was dealt a blow that catapulted her into
another realm, where she continues to search for answers and grapple for
closure. It was the day Anne Smith learnt that her only child, Jake
“Khumalo Boi” Smith (23), was no more. The motorsport and biking enthusiast was stabbed to death at
the Armitage Road KFC drive-through after an alleged altercation with a former
Maritzburg United footballer and his driver, S’boniso Edward Dlamini, who was
the only person subsequently charged with Smith’s murder. Dlamini stood trial and recently walked out of the courtroom
a free man after being acquitted by the court. The full reasons for his acquittal could not be ascertained
by Weekend Witness since the record of the case is unavailable. Anne, who prefers to be referred to as “Jake’s mom”, found
out the unsettling news when she received a “photograph” on her phone from a
friend. Oblivious to what it was, she zoomed in and confusion reigned. In a nutshell, it read that Dlamini’s case was finalised
with him being acquitted. “It’s ridiculous ... I don’t know what’s going on …
after four years I still don’t have closure,” she exclaimed. Beneath a tough “biker” exterior, lies a broken woman, who
is struggling to make sense of what has transpired since the former BMX racing
champion’s death. “He was going to look after me. He used to phone me everyday
to ask if I needed anything … [He would say] I love you. “I will do anything for you. I am going to look after you,”
remembers Jake’s mother, her voice cracking to give way to tears. She has no qualms about admitting that she was a tough
mother who expected only the best out of her son. Having served as a sergeant
major in the army, she instilled discipline in him. Smith, a former Carter High
School pupil, had been captain of the rugby, hockey and soccer teams. He was a salesperson at Steel and Pipe Trading. Her friend Joe van Rooyen, who was present during the
interview, said: “Jake was a wonderful, polite, caring young man who did all he
could to help others.” This is how the name “Khumalo Boi” originated, chipped in
his mom enthusiastically. She said her multilingual son — who spoke Xhosa, Zulu and
Sesotho — used to go “drifting” and once came across a young boy who became
ecstatic when he heard the engine roar. His surname was Khumalo. The
engine-roaring “spinner” stopped the car and approached the boy’s dad to ask
permission to take the child for a drive. The father refused saying the boy had
no legs and that it would not be safe. Jake’s mom added her son, who was dedicated to inspiring
township youth, then held the boy around his waist, lifted him up and down,
made a revving sound and explained “that’s how it felt”. “He told the child he will always ride with him. That’s
where the name Khumalo Boi comes from,” she said. Jake’s mom lights up, her eyes sparkle when she chats about
her son and the hardships they endured with her being a single parent. The
spiritual woman said she misses him terribly and she hurts all the time,
“everywhere she goes”.  Online outrage Facebookers slammed the justice system and expressed shock
and outrage when they found out that the man who had been charged with the
murder was acquitted. Yashika Sukhaye posted: “Shocking...We Live In SA, justice
system is pathetic”. Tom Wills echoed similar sentiments saying: “Shocking, no
justice in SA!!” Kim Fouche Ireland How said: “Is this possible. It was a
very straight forward case. We have to do something”.