Scottsville woman Kavina Rajcoomar says she is living in
fear after allegedly enduring two years of harassment and online abuse from
another woman. She has taken Swasthie Singh to the harassment court seeking
an order to stop Singh from harassing, stalking, and communicating with her,
her boyfriend Salim George Essop and their 10-year-old son. Because the case came before court for the first time on Friday,
Singh, who sells cleaning products, has not yet responded to the allegations.
She has until next month to file her replies to the allegations by Rajcoomar. Rajcoomar alleged in an affidavit that Singh had set up two
fake Facebook profiles, from which she sent several messages to Essop claiming
that Rajcoomar was cheating on him. One fake profile allegedly posted photos of Rajcoomar’s son. In papers before the court, Rajcoomar attached screenshots
of graphic messages to Essop as well as of slanderous public messages Singh
allegedly left on Rajcoomar’s business’ Facebook page using those fake
profiles. Call logs from a “private number” caller, alleged to be
Singh, are also attached to the papers. Rajcoomar said that a section 205 police report, which
unmasks private number callers, had fingered Singh as the alleged perpetrator
of the phone calls. Rajcoomar claimed to have voice recordings of some calls
where the caller uses graphic language toward her and Essop. Rajcoomar alleges in court papers that Singh has been
harassing her and members of her family for two years — including swearing at
and threatening her son, insinuating that Rajcoomar is a drug addict and has
Aids, and is promiscuous and cheating on Essop.  Alleged stalker, Swasthie Singh. She alleged Singh would call her while parked at a nearby
petrol station and say that she was watching her. One attachment to the papers showed a screenshot where
Singh, allegedly under the name Cindy Pillay, wrote on Rajcoomar’s business’
Facebook page, Party Themes and Decor, calling her a “home wrecker” (sic) who
will “go to church like [an] innocent thing” despite “jollin” with other men. In a series of private messages to Essop, Singh, this time
allegedly under the name Zia Abbas, said Rajcoomar was cheating on him with a
man “old enough to be her father”. In other messages, “Abbas” told Essop: “your girlfriend uses
your phone to msg other men n make plans. How sick is she.” Rajcoomar said in papers: “I’m afraid [for] my life as this
lady is unstable … We [are] afraid to come out the house, open our windows and
curtains … She is a psycho woman. “I have trust issues and fear for my life and my son.” She said in an affidavit that she believed Singh was
“jealous” of her because she believed Rajcoomar was having an affair with a
former colleague of Singh’s with whom Singh herself had an affair. The man in question and Singh were allegedly fired from
their workplace because of the affair. That man then became Rajcoomar’s
production manager at another workplace. The matter was adjourned to December 14.