You know what? It’s been a bit of a rough year. Casting my
mind back over the past 11 months, it feels like we’ve been through the wars in
some ways, in our beloved city. But wouldn’t it be nice if we ended it on a high? How about
we get a good thing going? The kind of thing that we can all relate to. What if
we remembered the good things about this year? What if we looked back at the high notes, instead of the
low, and started a groundswell of good vibes about the year that was. I’m happy to start the ball rolling. This is what I recall I
really liked about this year, in no particular order, except for the first one. I remember the incredible dedication and skill of the
medical people I’ve seen this year. From the varied doctors and specialists to
the physiotherapists, nurses, lab and X-ray staff and pharmacists who’ve helped
me in Pietermaritzburg; they’ve all been absolutely phenomenal. They’ve fixed
me in so many ways that I feel like a new person. Isn’t it nice to know we are
in such good hands here? I remember the great collegial atmosphere at work, when
things were stressful and deadlines loomed seemingly way too soon, with staff
off, and everyone pitched in to bring the paper out with professionalism and
total dedication. I remember the swell of pride I felt at seeing various shows
in the city, mostly at the Hexagon, by local artists and thinking to myself,
damn we’re talented in this neck of the woods. The applause and delight of the
audience buoyed me up every time. I remember, and still see, the beautiful purple haze of the
much-maligned but still very pretty jacaranda trees, spreading their calm
beauty across the city. I remember the criminal cases where we thought the baddies
would never be caught and guess what, hard work and sheer determination by
police and security companies got them. And they were speedily brought to
justice. I remember leaving our back door unlocked inadvertently one
night, and finding we were not murdered or robbed the next morning. That was
nice. I remember that time the traffic lights all synced perfectly
and I got home in no time. I remember when my street light was fixed and the
potholes I reported were repaired. I remember the many times my darling neighbour called me at
work to say she’d made us supper and I wouldn’t have to cook that night. I
remember feeling grateful and mentally hugged by her many acts of kindness. I remember the azaleas in Wylie Park and how stunning they
were in spring, and the cascades of jasmine throughout the city perfuming us
perfectly. I remember the three Cape Robin Chat eggs in the nest in the
staghorn fern on our wall at home and the delight at the squeaky bicycle wheel
noise the babies made. I remember the crowned lapwings that nested at The Witness
premises and how we watched the babies grow each day, our own wildlife show in
the heart of industria. I remember the treasures unearthed at second-hand bookshops
around the city. I remember the leisurely walks at the Botanical Gardens and
the wonder felt in the presence of the mighty plane tree avenue. I remember the excitement of seeing Midmar overflowing and
the crowds of happy people driving in to see the wondrous sight of a drought’s
goodbye. I remember a shift in the leadership of the country and
thinking optimistically about the future. I remember a disruption in the leadership of the City and
thinking optimistically about the future. I remember seeing youngsters I had invested my time in
flourishing as they listened and learnt, and also taught me so much. I remember the dog trapped down a deep drain that was
rescued as its friend waited faithfully at the top of the well. I remember they
were reunited. I remember the numerous achievements of those I work with. I remember the births of new babies, much-anticipated and
loved. I remember the times people said thank you or well done or
paid me, and us as a team, an unexpected compliment. I remember the many times we scooped our opposition! I remember the good times with friends and family. This was easier than I thought it would be. Okay, now it’s
your chance. Ready, steady, go! (If you want to, please send me your lists. I’d
love to read them. E-mail: stephs@witness.co.za)