A 73-year-old Scottsville
woman was left traumatised after being tied up by armed intruders during a
three-hour ordeal on Friday, in another attack on the elderly in just a few
days. The slight woman, who
asked not to be named, said two intruders put all her belongings in bags, and
told her at gunpoint that she would have to drive them to Cedara with the bags. But the men left her
home in New England Road without taking the bags — leading the woman to fear
they may be back soon to finish the job. “I was busy with the
washing machine when they came in through the back entrance,” the visibly
shaken retiree told Weekend Witness. “They grabbed hold of
me and took me to a bedroom and held me captive for three hours. They packed
all my things in bags.” The woman took
Weekend Witness through the house, where items like clothing and electronics
were all stuffed in large bags. The intruders left
most rooms in a state after the ransacking. A secret compartment in the floor
boards in one room was broken open. She said they left
with her bank cards, a cell phone, a tablet, her car keys — but not the car —
and a small amount of cash. “After a while I heard no noise, but I stayed down
for a while. I then managed to wriggle free and I ran outside and screamed for
help. A passing motorist took me to my local church and the pastor called my
son.” When Weekend Witness
visited the scene, concerned family members had arrived to console the woman,
and a locksmith was changing the locks on her front gate. She said awful thoughts
of being shot or raped were running through her mind during the traumatic
ordeal. “I was just praying
and saying ‘Lord, please help me’. “I feel calmer now
that my children are here to comfort me.” She said this was the
worst incident she has experienced in some 30 years of living in that home. “We
only once saw someone running through the yard — but nothing like this.” The woman said she
will not stay at the house for a few days until she settles down. Police confirmed a
case of house robbery is under investigation. The Witness reported
this week that 94-year-old Jimmy McGlinchey was strangled to death in the
nearby suburb of Hayfields. This year, local man
Kershwin Goldstone (22) was sentenced to three life terms in prison for the
murders of elderly people Patricia Moreen Ann O’Connor (92), Roland Heathcote
(89), and Patricia Elizabeth Tugwell (89), after he gained entry into their
rooms at old age homes and robbed and murdered them. 