As we head towards
the 2019 national elections, many people say they feel more than a little
conflicted about where their political loyalties lie. Everything about the
political landscape since 1994 has been turned on its head. The characters of
the parties are completely different from what they were in the first rosy days
of democracy. The leaders have
changed, their ethos has changed and the shiny, happy veneer has melted. Many of us are
disillusioned. We’re tired of the promises and let down by the lies. And in this surreal
political landscape, where the unthinkable has often become reality, the
jolly-sounding word “shenanigans” has become the word of the moment. People love saying
it. Political analysts bandy it about. People spout it like it’s just come into
fashion, although it’s as old as the hills. South African news is
awash with “shenanigans”. It’s often spat out of some disapproving person’s
mouth as an accusation, like a swear word, but it still sounds merry somehow.
She-nan-i-gans! I suppose this is not helped by the ubiquitous pop culture
memes of “I declare shenanigans” and the humorous connotations the word has in
that particular sense. Back to the ballot
dilemma. I think most of us agree that the past few years have not been kind to
the ANC. Once the champion of the South African political scene — the saviour of freedom — the image of this giant of a party has degenerated
into a public relations nightmare, a maelstrom of accusations, vilifications
and hurt. We in KZN have been
particularly hard hit, with provincial politics flavoured with the blood of
those assassinated because of intraparty squabbles, and for the sake of
lucrative tenders. The culture of
corruption, largely inculcated by its erstwhile head Jacob Zuma, has tainted
the ANC to its very core. Many people say they no longer find it worthy of
their cross on the ballot paper. Although there’s been a change in leadership,
Zuma’s shenanigans were allowed to continue far longer than they should have,
allowing the tentacles of his dubious conduct to continue to pervade the public
service. We’ve all been
depressed by the “if our leader cheats, why shouldn’t we all?” theme that’s
become too apparent. The DA, too, has had
its fair share of shenanigans. Beside the dramatic leadership struggles, its
image is also dented by becoming a party of finger pointers and preachy
sanctimoniousness. They seem happiest
when they’re slagging off the ANC. Sure, Mmusi Maimane looks good in a suit,
but that’s not really enough is it? Where is its teeth? Where is its muscle?
Why so much whining? Why isn’t it doing more? The EFF is still
trying its hardest to be a party to be reckoned with, but with Zuma out of the
picture and land redistribution firmly on the ANC agenda, what noise can it
make next? And that’s all it
really is to many. A Big Noise. Oh, and it has also had its fair share of
shenanigans in recent weeks. The IFP just seems a
bit tired in some senses. Well, wouldn’t you be with the same leader for over
40 years? The NFP (is it still
a party? many ask) has a lot to do to bring itself back onto the political
landscape. That’s about all I can say about it. A cross for Cope may
feel like a wasted vote nowadays and the principal personality of the party,
Terror Lekota, so loved in his heyday, has slid somewhat in the estimations of
many after a few gasp-worthy utterances. So, what will we do — we, the disillusioned — come voting day, 2019? Will we rush to the poles to
spoil our vote? Will we stay home and
watch it all on TV, without committing ourselves to any party? Or will we fall into
the trap of the politics of personality and vote for whoever was most charming
in the lead-up? Or who looked best in a suit? Maybe we’re ready for
the Next Big Thing. Maybe it’s time for a party that has no stinking baggage
and a clean slate. Imagine the novelty of that. Maybe it will be called
Shenanigans Must Fall. I could get behind that.