A local taxi driver has accused two Alexandra Road police
station officers of being heavy handed for pointing a gun at him after a
traffic violation. The officers caught the taxi driver driving in the oncoming
lane in College Road on Monday during the morning rush hour. Thabani “Tiger” Sosibo (35), from Imbali, told Weekend
Witness that a police officer had pointed a gun at him when he was pulled over. “A car had broken down. It was about the eighth car in front
of me. There were no cars on the other lane so I swerved and drove in the
oncoming lane,” he said. Unfortunately for Sosibo, there was a police car with two
officers in it among the cars he had overtaken and they instructed him to pull
over. “I know that I was in the wrong but I was expecting them to
just give me a fine, not to point a gun at me. “I was instructed to get out of the taxi with my hands above
my head and kneel on the ground. They forced me to lie face down and started
searching me. One of the officers was pointing the gun at me. I had nothing on
me and had not protested or insulted them,” he said. Sosibo alleged that the officer who was searching him kept
on insulting him and swearing at him. “He said we think we own the road. He called me an idiot, a
p***k and a motherf****r in front of my passengers and I just kept on laughing
because I knew I had done nothing wrong.” He said the officers then made him sit on the ground across
the road. After a short while they let him go and also drove off. He was not
fined, arrested or charged. Sosibo said people had gathered around them and some were
taking videos and pictures of him having a gun pointed at him. “It was as if I was a wanted hard-core criminal. People had
gathered to watch.” He said there was a video on Facebook of the incident that
had more than 7 500 views by Friday afternoon. “My 12-year-old son doesn’t want to go to school because his
schoolmates were laughing at him telling him that ‘your father is a criminal
because we saw him being arrested by the police’. It was very demeaning,
embarrassing and uncalled for. If they wanted to arrest me they could have done
it without pointing a gun at me.” Sosibo has since opened a case of pointing a firearm against
the officers. He said he was left very traumatised by the incident as his late
brother had been shot dead. “I also just want to know if the officers’ behaviour was
called for,” he said. He said he would be seeking legal advice on how to take the
matter further. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele had
not responded to questions from Weekend Witness on the matter by late Friday.