Pollution is everyone’s problem. It requires all hands on deck instead of everyone looking to
a few to keep our rivers free of the rivers of waste that compromise water
quality. This is what Imbali’s Sanele Vilakazi tries to preach to
everyone he meets with hopes that they will play their part in keeping rivers
pollution free. Vilakazi is a pollution control officer with the
Duzi-uMngeni Conservation Trust (Duct), where he is the project manager for the
sewer line discharge as well as the general river pollution monitoring and
maintenance programmes. He said Duct’s mission was to champion the environmental
health of the Msunduzi and uMngeni rivers. They cover more than 40 000 sewer
lines and also monitor rivers for signs of industrial pollution and
disturbance. “Most people, especially in townships, take it for granted
that water is a natural resource so there is an assumption that it will always
be there but they don’t consider that their actions are compromising its
quality. “There might come a time where it will become too difficult
to treat [water] to a potable standard,” he said. The 28-year-old said more programmes like Duct’s were needed
to make people aware of the consequences of their actions  — even simple things like littering. He said
communities needed to learn about the ripple effects so that they will be more
conscious of their environment. “When you go out and engage with communities you realise
that some of the things they do are not intentional, they just didn’t know. So
we need to empower them with the necessary knowledge so that they can change
the way they do things.” Vilakazi bemoaned poor waste management practices across
cities like Pietermaritzburg and Durban saying illegal dumping was rife and
people also used open sewer manholes to dispose their refuse. He said there was
also an ongoing problem of sewage spills and leaks, which were sometimes left
unattended for days. Vilakazi’s worst nightmare is that one day the water in the
Msunduzi River would be untreatable. “We have to do something now because we are heading for
trouble. We mustn’t wait until there is a natural disaster or water becomes too
expensive to treat before we act,” he said. While they are slowly making headway in fighting pollution,
Vilakazi said one of Duct’s other big challenges were illegal sand mining
activities. “We are not against people getting sand because we know that
it’s needed for construction purposes, but we have to make sure that it’s done
in a sustainable manner and that’s often not the case with the illegal
operators.” He said their actions had led to loss of lives as they not
only altered the course of the rivers — which led to flooding — but also failed
to rehabilitate the areas they worked in. “They leave deep trenches and we’ve had cases where children
drowned while swimming … There are so many of these sites along uMngeni Valley
and we are really struggling to keep up because they jump from site to site to
avoid getting caught.” He said the government needs to invest more resources in the
monitoring and enforcing the law when it comes to sand mining to deter the
illegal operators. “Those caught need to be brought to book because delaying
justice favours them so they just continue degrading our rivers.” Who is Sanele Vilakazi? Sanele Vilakazi holds a B.Sc in geography and environmental
management from the University of KZN and is working towards an honours degree
from Unisa. Prior to joining Duct in 2013, Vilakzi worked in a diverse
range of environmental industries from consultancies to local government and
also gained experience working at Msunduzi Municipality after completing his
studies in 2012. He loves football and previously played for Edendale’s
Special 11 but now coaches youngsters who are interested in the sport. If Vilakazi were to have a conversation with his 13-year-old
self, he would tell the teen to be more open-minded and willing to learn. “I would tell him to also open his heart to other people so
that he would be able to work with everyone he comes to meet.” He said he would advise him not to run away from difficult
situations but use them to learn because “even failure carries a great lesson”. “When you face difficulties head-on you become stronger, it
sharpens your thinking and tact for dealing with similar situations in future
because life will not always be easy.” Seven things Duct does for river health 1. Reduce industrial pollution Duct lobbies for more extensive and intensive monitoring of
industrial pollution in the river. Duct teams and volunteers provide eyes on
the ground to assist the authorities to pick up new instances of industrial
pollution as soon as possible. Changes to the municipal bylaws are required to make it more
difficult for certain industries to get away with using the sewers and
stormwater drains to dispose of excessive amounts of toxic substances. 2. Removal and control of invasive alien vegetation Duct has significantly reduced the riverside infestations of
bugweed, balloon vine, water lettuce, water hyacinth, lantana, syringa,
wattles, gums and others. They do this using a combination of physical removal,
herbicides and biological control, and work closely with the Department of
Environment Affairs and Umgeni Water. 3. Increase flows in rivers Duct lobbies for the implementation of the environmental
flow provisions in the Water Act of 1998, which have not yet for various
reasons been implemented in the uMngeni catchment. 4. Regulation of sand mining Duct has tried over the years to engage with the Department
of Mining to improve the monitoring and regulation of sand mining activities in
the Duzi and uMngeni valleys. They have had more success with the Department of
Water Affairs and Environment Affairs, as well as with the eThekwini Metro, all
of whom are also trying to limit uncontrolled mining. 5. Improve land care and reduction of soil erosion Duct has a programme of improved land care and soil erosion
prevention in the upper Msunduzi catchment, and has also implemented erosion
control measures along the route of the Guinea Fowl portage in the Devil’s
Cauldron section. This work will be expanded if funding can be sourced from
the likes of the Department of Environment Affairs Working for Soil programme.
Unless land care in the catchment can be improved, siltation of the rivers and
the dams will proceed at an excessive rate. 6. Investment in communities Duct’s work over the years has resulted in employment
opportunities with more than R10 million paid in salaries in the communities
which live along the Duzi and uMngeni rivers. Approximately 300 people have been employed in various
aspects of environmental work; from alien plant control to erosion protection,
mountain bike trail building and litter removal. A number of supervisors have
also been employed from these same communities. 7. Bilharzia reduction One of Duct’s long-term goals is to reduce the incidence of
Bilharzia in the UMngeni River and surrounding communities. Take ownership of your spaces Vilakazi said it was easy for people to shift blame for
issues related to waste management to government yet they themselves did
nothing to protect their spaces. He used public parks as an example saying patrons often left
their litter scattered around when they were done with their activities. “There is a lack of responsibility because the bins are
often there but they just don’t bother to put it in there.” He said neighbours could also come together and clean their
streets instead of waiting for the municipality to send someone. He said people
must also do away with the mentality that littering created employment
opportunities for waste pickers. Vilakazi also said people must start thinking about the
legacy they want to leave for future generations instead of depleted natural
resources and filthy public spaces. Funding Duct, like other non-profit organisations, is always faced
with a risk of not being able to fund its river care and environmental
programmes due to inadequate funding. While they get some assistance from
government, Vilakazi said the private sector had not fully come on board.
“There are a lot of things that businesses could help us with such as trash
booms and storm water drain socks because that allows us to stop waste from
travelling downstream as it collects it at intervals along the river,” he said. A trash boom costs in the range of R20 000 and Vilakazi said
Duct needed at least 200 to cover 380 kilometres of the Duzi and uMngeni
rivers.