Creating a safe space for patrons of the Rage Festival to have fun is uppermost in the minds of the organisers. So says director Will McIntyre, who told The Witness that they take the responsibility placed on them by parents of those attending the festival very seriously. “Safety remains a cornerstone of all technical and logistical decision making,” he said. “We’ve been at this for over a decade now ...” Rage has developed a multi-tiered approach to its safety strategy, the most important decision being to keep the footprint of the festival to Ballito and Umhlanga. “We felt that Ballito was more central for all the people who were coming to the North Coast for the festival,” said Marina Oreb, marketing manager for G&G. “Ballito has more of a community feel, a place where people can walk around, plus the Ragers begged us to go back.” Every person attending is issued with a Rage Passport, which gives them a safe way to party and means they don’t have to bring along an ID or money. When they book their tickets, the organisers use integrated RFID chip technology to register the personal details of every Rager on the system. Every name is accompanied by emergency contacts and medical conditions. The passports can also be loaded with money to pay for drinks at the different venues and Rage Rides mean festival-goers don’t have to drive to and from the different festival hubs, which include a beach party and the Samsung Superclub at Sibaya Casino. Other security measures include an on-site police station inside the Sound Factory, private security teams and undercover police at all venues, with sniffer dogs at some locations. The organisers have also set up on-site medical services and have ambulance services in Ballito and Umhlanga on standby 24/7. There is also a group of volunteers, the Red Frogs, who are happy to help Ragers who need assistance. “Safety is extremely important to us,” said Oreb. “We work closely with the police and the local councils to ensure that Rage is safe. “There are uniformed officers and undercover officers who are there specifically to keep an eye on any suspicious behaviour, especially anything drug related. “Everyone gets a pat-down when they enter a venue. We don’t allow people to bring in any glass, tablets or even Vape flavour. “And we operate a shuttle service to and from people’s accommodation. All our official vehicles have a sticker on them and the drivers have been carefully vetted before being brought on board.” After moving their main venue, The Sound Factory, to King’s Park in Durban last year, the organisers of Rage Festival decided to bring it back to the home of rage — Ballito — for 2018. “It’s the best and the safest location we have,” said Oreb, “and bringing it back to Ballito makes it more accessible to more people.” To ensure Ragers have an unforgettable experience, the organisers are using state-of-the-art sound and lighting technology and world-class production at their various parties. • For more information about this year’s Rage Festival visit https://ragefestival.co.za/. • Rage Festival passports and tickets are strictly for sale to persons who will be 18 and over at the start of the festival, which runs from November 30 to December 8.