A young Woodlands woman was attacked by a family friend’s pitbull on Tuesday, and said had it not been for her boyfriend pulling the dog off her, she might be dead. Kerishnie Sankar (18) was at her home with her boyfriend on Tuesday afternoon when the attack occurred. She said the dog had belonged to a family friend but had been living with her family for the past six months. “I was with my boyfriend in the yard. I was sitting down and saw the dog running up to me but I thought he just wanted to play. “My boyfriend said to me ‘the dog is going to bite you, get up’ but I didn’t think it would.” Sitting in a wheelchair in the casualty waiting room of Northdale Hospital, Sankar tearfully recalled how the dog had almost bitten her throat and when she tried to run, he sunk his teeth into her leg. Sankar’s boyfriend Carlton Ryan (23) said the dog was looking at Sankar strangely and he told her to get up. “As she tried to get up, away from the dog, she slipped and the dog tried to go for her neck. I grabbed the dog and pulled him away and my girlfriend started to run. “The dog was so focused on her.” Sankar said as she began running, she slipped again by which time the dog had squirmed out of Ryan’s grip. “I was by the Wendy hut in the back when I slipped and the dog just grabbed my leg and bit into it.” An emotional Sankar said the dog had always been very good with the family. Sankar’s uncle, who asked not to be named, said he felt the fireworks that were set off in the area on Monday night might have aggravated and upset the dog, however, he said he did not know if there had been fireworks being let off during the time of the attack. When asked what the uncle would do with the dog, he said they would keep the dog but keep it on a short running chain tied to a lemon tree in the back yard. Ryan said he was thankful Sankar was alright and was not more severely injured. Sankar said she was extremely thankful to her boyfriend as she felt she might be dead had he not been there to pull the dog away from her. uMngeni SPCA manager Dudu Abraham said running chains were fine as a temporary measure until proper fencing was put up, but that no animal should be on a chain for all their lives. She said a dog can become aggressive and frustrated while on a running chain as it does not have freedom to be a dog and run around. Putting the dog on shorter chain would be “even worse”.