One of the men charged with the murders of seven members of the local Khoza family in Vlakfontein abandoned his bail application in the Lenasia Magistrate’s Court, in Johannesburg, on Monday. Fifita Khupe (61) and 27-year-old Vusi Mabaso (who used the alias Sibusiso Khoza) appeared in court on Monday on seven counts of premeditated murder, with Mabaso also facing three counts of rape. The suspects also face an additional charge of theft, as they were found with the bank cards of the deceased. Angry residents showed up in their numbers, calling for no bail to be given to the men. Mabaso opted not to apply for bail, while Khupe has instructed his legal aid attorney to begin his bail application. The case has been postponed to November 12 for a formal bail application. Jabu Khoza, a relative of the deceased, told The Witness on Monday that the family did not attend court on Monday as most of them were still in Pietermaritzburg. “We were told that he [Mabaso] said he will not be applying for bail as he fears for his life. The family will be attending court when the trial starts,” said Khoza. She added that Gogo Thoko Khoza, who was inconsolable when she first learnt about the death of her children and grandchildren, was doing well as she was taking medication to help keep her calm. National Prosecuting Authority spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane told the media outside the court that the state had a “solid case” and will ensure that the Khoza family receive justice. Khupe was allegedly romantically involved with one of the murder victims, although the motive for the murders is yet to be determined. Sibusiso Yende (29), the father of a two-year-old boy who was among the four children murdered, sat quietly in court. “I don’t know what to think right now. I’m still in so much pain,” he told News24 inside the courtroom. Gauteng Community Safety MEC Sizakele Nkosi-Malobane, who also attended, after being at the family’s funeral in Pietermaritzburg on Sunday, has condemned the “callous act”, calling the accused “b*****ds”. Mabaso was arrested in Mpumalanga province, while Khupe was arrested in Dobsonville, Soweto, on Saturday following a tip-off to the police.