Twenty-nine-year-old Mlungisi Zuma, who allegedly beheaded a young boy, had blamed the child’s mother for ruining his relationship with his girlfriend. This is what sources close to the investigation told The Witness on Thursday. The sources, who asked to remain anonymous, said Zuma had allegedly wanted 11-year-old Andile Fihla’s mother, Lindiwe Koboni, to feel the same pain he felt after losing his girlfriend, which was why he allegedly killed the innocent child. Zuma appeared briefly in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court on Thursday where he stood poker-faced in the dock showing absolutely no emotion. As soon as he strolled into the dock, a woman howled and shuffled out of the courtroom followed by two others. State prosecutor Patty David told magistrate Vincent Mcanyana that Zuma faces three charges; kidnapping the child on November 9 while he was walking to school, murdering him, and assaulting his mother with a stick so badly that her hand was broken, on November 7. David said the state was opposed to Zuma being released on bail and needed time to profile him. He was remanded in custody until November 30. A few members of the Copesville community came to court to catch a glimpse of a familiar face, but Koboni was not present. Thembi Dlongwane, a neighbour, said she had gone to Umzimkhulu to make funeral arrangements with the child’s father. “She is heart-broken,” said Dlongwane. Wiping away tears, she said the entire community is shocked by what happened. “Andile was a good boy. He was a nice child. He used to talk about the law a lot,” she said, adding she believed he would someday have become a lawyer because he used to do well at school. Zuma’s relative, Khumbuzile Hlongwane, shook her head in disbelief. “I don’t know what happened. He [Zuma] used to be a good boy. I don’t know what happened,” she said. The woman revealed that recently he used to “fight with women in the community but not men”. Koboni is allegedly the third woman he was accused of beating up. Andile’s body was found 500 metres from a dam in the Copesville area on Tuesday night. Police began searching for him from the time his disappearance was reported on November 9. Last week, police received information that the boy may have been seen near the dam. Members of the Pietermaritzburg SAPS Diving Unit, detective branch and the Umhlali K9 Unit then searched the bush and the heavily-polluted dam. Efforts to find him proved futile until Zuma handed himself over to police and police subsquently found Andile’s decapitated body.