Severe headaches, memory loss, pain and a barrage of tablets
each day. That’s what Comrades Marathon volunteer Johan Doubell (51)
suffers daily after he was run down by a hit-and-run driver while volunteering
at the race this year. Despite several operations and multiple hospital visits, he
has been left mostly wheel-chair bound. In an exclusive interview with Weekend Witness, sitting on
his couch with his crutches placed at his side, Doubell said he had been
through multiple operations this year and will be going for several more in the
new year. “I take around 50 tablets a day, including vitamins. I am on sleeping
tablets but they do not work very well. I have terrible nightmares and have
been told I often cover my face with my hands in my sleep as if I am trying to
protect myself. “I am in a wheel chair or in bed all day. I can only walk 20
steps at a time. I know I will never be able to walk without assistance again.
Since the accident, I have lost my job and my fiancée Erika has had to sell her
car to help with the mounting medical bills.” Talking about the accident itself, Doubell said he was three
metres off the road, bent over picking up water sachets, when he “heard tables
flying and people screaming”. “Then I looked up and saw the car’s two headlights in my
face.” It was at that moment that Doubell was struck by the bakkie. “I was on the bonnet of the car and then I was on the ground
and the car drove over me, reversed and sped off. “I remember being flung around, and then it was over and I
realised I could not feel my legs.” Doubell and his fiancée, Erika Kapp, set out early on the
morning of the Comrades Marathon, June 10, “for a lekker day”. The couple were
volunteers at one of the water stations in Ashburton when a bakkie hit three
women before it swerved into Doubell. His knee was broken in five places. He also suffered broken
ribs, a cracked skull, a Man ‘genuinely sorry’ for actions Speaking to Weekend Witness on Friday, the man who allegedly
ran over Doubell, who cannot be named as he has not appeared in court,
apologised to “each and every person” who was affected by the incident. “I want to apologise to the other people who were injured as
well as their families and loved ones. “I am genuinely sorry for that terrible morning,” said the
man, his voice thick with emotion. He handed himself over to police a few days after the
incident. Doubell said he had met with the man three weeks ago. “He
came to apologise to me,” he said. “Who am I to judge another person. I cannot be angry with
him for the rest of my life,” he said. Doubell said he found the man to be “a very nice guy who was
genuinely remorseful” for the incident. “I have forgiven him, however, I do
want justice to take its course. I don’t want him to be locked up and left to
rot in prison but I do want him to see the inside of a court room. Doubell said both he and the man were in the dark about what
was happening with the case. broken cheekbone and a collapsed lung. “I was in St
Anne’s Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for 15 days. “Doctors had told Erika they did not think I would make it. “After being in the ICU for three days, the doctors called
Erika and told her to come and say her goodbyes to me.” “All the bones in my forehead were fractured so they removed
them and replaced them with a plate,” said Doubell, lifting his hair to reveal
a large scar across his forehead. “My eye was hit right back into its socket. It had to be
sucked out and they placed netting behind it to prop it up.” Doubell said half the bones in his femur were crushed and
had to be removed, leaving him with half the bone, the rest being made of a
metal rod. However, his prognosis gradually started improving and after
his 15 days in ICU, he was moved to High Care. He said there were many people he had to thank, but above
all, he was most thankful for the support from his fiancée. “Erika works night
shifts as a nurse but still makes sure I am okay, that I eat and have my meds
and juice. She still does the dishes, the washing, cooks food and she has a
daughter in matric. “She has been amazing. She is a wonderful person,” said
Doubell, tears trickling down his face. “No one knows how much she has done. There is no replacing
her. I don’t think I would have had the will to live if it had not been for
her,” said Doubell. A police source who asked not to be named said that the
matter was sitting at the offices of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
for a decision on whether to prosecute the driver of the vehicle that struck
Doubell. KwaZulu-Natal national prosecuting authority spokesperson
Natasha Kara was unable to respond on Friday, saying it usually takes the
authority 48 hours to respond to media queries. Man ‘genuinely sorry’ for actions Speaking to Weekend Witness on Friday, the man who allegedly
ran over Doubell, who cannot be named as he has not appeared in court,
apologised to “each and every person” who was affected by the incident. “I want to apologise to the other people who were injured as
well as their families and loved ones. “I am genuinely sorry for that terrible morning,” said the
man, his voice thick with emotion. He handed himself over to police a few days after the
incident. Doubell said he had met with the man three weeks ago. “He
came to apologise to me,” he said. “Who am I to judge another person. I cannot be angry with
him for the rest of my life,” he said. Doubell said he found the man to be “a very nice guy who was
genuinely remorseful” for the incident. “I have forgiven him, however, I do
want justice to take its course. I don’t want him to be locked up and left to
rot in prison but I do want him to see the inside of a court room. Doubell said both he and the man were in the dark about what
was happening with the case.