A Scottsville woman got the shock of her life when she was
hijacked by four armed men at a busy intersection at the weekend. The visibly shaken pensioner, who asked not to be named for
her safety, said she was driving home at around 6.30 pm when the traumatic
ordeal happened. The 68-year-old woman was driving her Uno down Alexandra
Road and had stopped at the intersection to turn onto Chief Albert Luthuli
Street and drive towards Scottsville, when she was accosted by four neatly
dressed men. One of the men approached her window and pointed a firearm
at her. They demanded she hand over her belongings and step out of
the vehicle. “Everything seemed to happen at the speed of light. One
minute the car had stopped at the robot and these men jumped out and the next,
a man was pointing a gun at me. It was terrible,” she recalled. “I did not know what was happening. It was chaos. I thought
I was dying,” said the woman, who added that she thought the gunman was going
to kill her when he ordered her from the car. There was a tussle when she tried to reach for her handbag,
which she had placed on the passenger seat. The robbers opened her door and threw her on the side of the
road and drove off at a high speed towards Alexandra Road in her Fiat Uno, with
her handbag that contained two cell phones and her wallet containing bank cards
and her driver’s licence. The car was discovered a few minutes later crashed on the
pavement on York Avenue with all her belongings still inside. The woman said the four men, who had also stopped at the
intersection intending to turn onto Alexandra Road from Chief Albert Luthuli,
jumped out of a white Mercedes. “I didn’t think much of it. They were all dressed well, I
thought maybe they got a lift and they were just going to walk past my car.
Then the gunman came to my window and asked for my cell phone.” She said the other three then opened the doors and got into
her car. While she was being pushed out of the vehicle, she tried to
yank the car keys out of the ignition but one of the men opened the car door
and pushed her out. The woman said the attack took place in full view of
passers-by who did not help, except for a man begging at the intersection. “The road was busy. There were pedestrians and two or three
cars behind me. No one came out to assist me. I think everyone was scared,” she
said. “I tried to stop people to please help me but they all
ignored me. I even gestured to the driver of the white Mercedes to help me and
he just showed me the middle finger.” She said the white Mercedes then sped off and followed the
Uno and she realised that the Mercedes driver was one of the robbers. The woman’s daughter said her mother was dazed when they
found her. Alexandra Road police station spokesperson Captain Kholeka
Mhlongo confirmed that they are investigating a case of hijacking. “No arrests have been made,” said Mhlongo. 