An 83-year-old man is the latest elderly victim of violent robbers in the city. He was hit on the head with a metal rod and his home was ransacked on Monday. An unknown assailant forced open the back door of the home Timothy Clifford has lived in for 31 years and hit him multiple times on his head and arms. He then dragged Clifford to various rooms while he ransacked the house. The attack on the retired man, who has trouble walking properly, is the third attack on an elderly person The Witness has reported on in the last two weeks. Clifford is an Irish national who came to South Africa to teach. He is the former deputy headmaster of St Charles College and of Mpophomeni High School. He lives alone at the home, which is in the CBD, not far from the retirement homes where three elderly people were targeted by a serial killer earlier this year. Police sources said a small amount of cash and an unused cell phone were taken, and the suspect fled on foot. His son, Colin, said clothing and electronics were also taken, but his father was on Monday having trouble taking stock of the losses, as he was still in shock. Colin, who lives in Durban, said he received a call from his father on Monday morning about the incident. He said his father sustained injuries on his head, arms, and elbows. He will be kept in hospital for observation. “He is shaken. For an 83-year-old to be attacked in their own home, it’s a terrifying ordeal,” Colin told The Witness. “He lives alone but we come up [from Durban] and check on him, and he always said he didn’t want to leave that home. That will change now.” Police confirmed a case of robbery is under investigation. Two weeks ago, 94-year-old Scottish man Jimmy McGlinchey was strangled to death at his home in the suburb of Hayfields. Intruders stole his car, which was later recovered in the Eastern Cape. There have still been no arrests made in that matter, police confirmed yesterday. A few days later, a 73-year-old woman was tied up and robbed by two unknown men at her home in Scottsville. Earlier this year, Patricia Moreen Ann O’Connor (92), Roland Heathcote (89), and Patricia Elizabeth Tugwell (89) were murdered in their rooms at retirement homes in the CBD. Kershwin Goldstone (22) was sentenced to three life terms in prison for the murders. He had gained entry into their rooms and robbed and murdered them.