MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
Nomusa Dube-Ncube has condemned the murder of the acting director for community
services at the uMvoti Municipality. The senior traffic officer, Thobani “TM” Ndaba, who grew up
in Pietermaritzburg, was attacked by unknown gunmen in his office in Greytown
on Thursday evening. According to the uMvoti spokesperson, Phindile Phungula,
Ndaba was leaving an official municipal meeting when he was shot. Dube-Ncube said that Ndaba’s murder was an attack on the
rule of law in the country as criminal elements continued to destabilise the
institution of local government. “As a province, we will not succumb to these criminal
elements, we urge communities to come forward with information that will lead
to the arrest of the perpetrators of this heinous crime,” said Dube-Ncube. She said the province had lost yet another dedicated public
servant whose wealth of experience and knowledge benefited the people. “We call upon the law enforcement agencies to leave no stone
unturned in their search for the criminals responsible for this murder.” Phungula said Ndaba joined uMvoti in 2011 as a traffic
officer, examining drivers licences and motor vehicles, “being a hardworking
and dedicated employee, he worked his way up to manager [for] public safety in
2015”. The former pupil at Siqongweni High School, in Edendale,
previously worked as a provincial inspector for the Road Traffic Inspectorate. “His absence will be greatly felt by all he crossed paths
with,” she said. “We pass our deepest condolences, especially to his wife and
their two young children, as well as his family at large. “As an institution and the public at large, we have lost a
dedicated public servant.” A case of murder was opened at Greytown police station for
investigation. No arrests had been made at the time of publication. In 2016, Msunduzi’s chief traffic officer Pumla Dlamini was
gunned down at his office on Washington Road. One of Dlamini’s junior officers, Sifiso Hlengwa, was
charged with his murder. He is out on bail. The trial began last year but has been adjourned several
times due to Hlengwa’s challenges with the appointment of his legal team. • nokuthula.ntuli@witness.co.za