The man whose body was penetrated by a 1,8-metre metal industrial crowbar in a mining accident, completed his seventh Comrades Marathon race on Sunday. Following the serious injury in 2015, Danie de Wet (36) against all odds completed Sunday’s Comrades race in a time of 11:30:37. De Wet, an engineering supervisor, was impaled by a 1,8-metre crowbar while washing out a dam 3,5 km underground at a mine in Carletonville, Gauteng, using an extended crowbar to stir up the mud. Read: Man running the Comrades again after freak injury He slipped and the metal bar penetrated his body through his groin area and came out of his back, just below his shoulder blade. He was treated at Netcare Milpark Hospital where the crowbar was removed from his body and he began his long journey to recovery, never imagining that three years down the line, he would be able to run the Comrades Marathon again. He later presented the 1,8-metre metal rod as a token of his appreciation to Professor Ken Boffard, the current secretary-general of the International Society of Surgery, and Netcare Milpark Hospital. De Wet said Sunday’s race was a tough one but he was relieved that he managed to cross the finish line. “At 60 km in the race I told myself that there was only 30 km left but I felt like giving up,” he said. “What kept me going was thinking about the accident and how tough that was but I still managed to pull through. I told myself that I need to get this done. “I think the cheers and words of encouragement from all the supporters, my wife and friends definitely helped me and other runners finish the race.” De Wet, who last ran Comrades in 2013, said his wife, Liezl, was also “stoked” when he crossed the finish line. “When she saw me approaching the finish she started crying in relief,” he said. As a symbol of appreciation to Professor Boffard, De Wet will once again honour him by giving him his Comrades 2018 medal on Thursday. “My story is only just one of many other inspirational Comrades stories. I heard that a woman who was diagnosed with cancer in January was also running with us and there was also the man who managed to complete the race using crutches. This just shows that people need to believe in themselves and remember that every day is a miracle through the grace of God,” he said.