A Northdale family have had to watch their daughter’s condition deteriorate over the five years since she was run over by a motorcycle — twice. In 2013, Krystnn Durgaparsad, who was four years old at the time, was run over while walking home from school with her siblings when the family lived in Kempton Park, Johannesburg. The family said the motorcyclist then turned around and rode over her body again, before pulling up his helmet’s visor and swearing at her sister Kaylee and brother Kiaan. According to a medical report, Krystnn sustained a long laceration to her face, damage to her skull, lung damage, a cut on her liver, swelling on her knees, and a torn muscle in her heart. A visible tyre mark remains on her right thigh. Her family told The Witness she spent nine days in a coma in intensive care. Her father Shane said no one has yet come before the courts for the incident. “We want justice to be served. “At some point someone must be held accountable. This person is living a happy life while our child suffers,” he said. In the last week, her condition has gone downhill, with doctors now finding that she has gone blind in her left eye. “She was experiencing chest pain, which is unusual. We are both trained paramedics, so we had equipment to check her. We saw her heart rate was irregular,” Krystnn’s mother, Vanessa, said. Vanessa said they spent the last week between several hospitals trying to get to the bottom of Krystnn’s condition. She said a paediatrician tested Krystnn and found her to be completely blind in her left eye. “When the muscles around the eye are functioning the person can think the eye still works so that’s why she may not have known. “This showed us how bad her condition has got over the years. We have had to battle with public healthcare which makes appointments months later. What else has cropped up in the interim?” Shane said. Her parents said she has also begun having nightmares, and they fear repressed memories of the ordeal may be resurfacing. “She doesn’t remember anything and when she asks us why she has scars on her face we don’t know what to say,” Vanessa said. Gauteng police spokesperson Captain Mavela Masondo said police could only respond to a query on Wednesday, as the old docket needed to be retrieved.