 Relax. There are probably no lions roaming free
around Umlaas Road. The reports about two lionesses on Wednesday morning
sparked a frenzied hunt along the freeway between Camperdown and Ashburton for
the big cats. Facebook and WhatsApp groups were abuzz with the
news of the two lionesses being seen “crossing the N3” in the vicinity of
Umlaas Road. The Witness was
told that a woman driving from Ashburton toward Durban reportedly spotted the
hind legs of what she believed to be two lionesses disappearing into the bush
and called a local radio station with her news. In a matter of minutes social media was in an
uproar. Concerned farmers, residents and staff in the area posted alerts and
expressed concern about the safety of their stock and pets. At least one worker
in the vicinity of the Lion Park told The Witness that he
feared for his life. A traffic report on a local radio station also
spread the news and a local resident said motorists started slowing down while
passing through the area in the hopes of spotting the majestic beasts. A local resident, who asked not to be named, said
on Wednesday morning he was too scared to walk to his house in case he crossed
paths with the lionesses. It was also reported that staff at various
companies in the area had refused to work on Wednesday morning after hearing
about the alleged sighting. KZN Lion Park owner Brian Boswell said that by 10 am
on Wednesday, the park had received over 50 calls from media outlets, residents
and local law enforcement authorities as there are no other lion parks, or
lions in captivity on properties in that area. “All our lions are accounted for,” said Boswell. “We counted them three times this morning and
Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife has also come to check. “From what we can gather, the woman who called in
the sighting was driving early in the morning when it was still dark and did
not see a tail, only hind legs,” said Boswell. He said that it is suspected two Boerbulls from a
local farm, which are often seen on the road, might have been mistaken for big
cats. “I am not saying there isn’t a lion out there as
this has not been confirmed but it is highly unlikely as it is only me that has
lions in this area,” he said. An Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife source said the report
about the lioness sighting had caused “hysteria and chaos” and that search
parties and emergency groups were out all morning searching for the lionesses. “We have called off the search. We are 90% sure the
report was a hoax.” Ezemvelo spokesperson Musa Mntambo confirmed the
organisation were aware of the reports but said later as far as they knew, the
report was a hoax.   