Treasurer of the now disbanded ANC Moses Mabhida regional leadership, Pat Jaca, has broken his silence on the political tensions in the region. In a tell-all interview with The Witness, Jaca admitted that the disbanded leadership has failed the region and said none of those who served in the disbanded regional leadership should contest any positions in the upcoming regional leadership election. Jaca blamed factionalism for the political tension that has led to 14 ANC activists in the region being shot and killed since 2016. “Three months after we were elected to office, we started fighting each other and we failed to do what we had been sent to do,” he said. The Moses Mabhida regional executive was elected in 2014. At the conference, Super Zuma was elected as regional chairperson, Chris Ndlela as deputy regional chairperson, Mzi Zuma as the regional secretary while Thobekile Maphumulo was elected as the regional deputy secretary. In 2016, Mthandeni Dlungwana was elected as regional chairperson after Super Zuma was elected as provincial secretary. Jaca said tensions in the regional leadership had spilled over to the ANC councillor candidate selection process, where the killings started. At the time, Jaca was Msunduzi ward 22 councillor. He is among many ANC councillors who were not re-elected due to suspected faction fights in the ANC. “I will never forget that period. It was the first time that you had a member of the top five, a regional treasurer, not being deployed to any position,” he said. With next year’s general election looming, Jaca said he expected the divisions to deepen in the ANC. “The ANC will be compiling lists of people who will be representing them in provincial legislatures and in Parliament soon and after that it will be local government elections. These factions are permanent and I feel sorry for Cyril Ramaphosa who is leading in these tough times. “Even now, we are approaching June 16, which is Youth Day, but no one is talking about June 16. All people are talking about is conferences and positions,” he said. Jaca said before that there were many incidents which signalled that his days as ward councillor were numbered. “I was once called into a disciplinary committee meeting attended by Bheki Cele and Jeff Radebe. The regional leadership had complained to national leadership that I did not attend meetings. I told Cele and Radebe that this was just a beginning of the faction fights and I warned that this thing will spill over to national. “I was also hauled before a disciplinary committee for speaking at a funeral of my friend in Caluza back in 2016. They told me that I should have asked for permission from regional leadership. Who asks for permission to go and speak at a friend’s funeral? “It was also at that time that my son, Lunga, was shot at. Although people were arrested after that, the case was later withdrawn,” he said. Jaca said he was, however, proud of his contributions to the ANC and people of ward 22 where he served as a ward councillor for three terms. “I am 64 years old now and I do not want positions anymore,” he said.