 Elandskop residents in Ward 8 are calling for Councillor
Makhosazane Zondo to step down, saying she has been unresponsive to their
concerns and never attends community meetings. The residents staged a march to
the Pietermaritzburg City Hall on Friday, hoping this would get Zondo’s
attention and that of the mayor Themba Njilo. At the centre of their
grievances is that Zondo does not consult with the community about projects as
per the municipal systems act and regulations. “We have complained many times
to her about this, but she is very unresponsive,” said convener Siyabonga Zaca. “We want her removed because
she is not doing anything for the community. What is the use of staying with a
useless councillor for five years? She must go.” Zaca said they were also
concerned that various community projects had been abandoned with claims that
the municipality didn’t have money. “We are demanding to know what
happened to the budget for Mhlungu and Ngcobo Nazareth access roads. We want
that money, and the process of grading and gravelling should resume as early as
next month.” He said they wanted Njilo to
conduct an investigation and provide residents with feedback within 14 days,
failing which they will take their own decision as the community. Residents also complained that
sections of the ward did not have sufficient water and electricity. Phetheni Shelembe said that in
her area, they have not had water for two years. “We demand that water tanker
trucks be provided as it happens in the other wards. We are tired of being told
that the municipality has no money ... It is our constitutional right to have
access to sufficient water,” she said. She added that the continuing
electricity outages were another urgent problem. “We lose our food because it
rots when the electricity is gone. Why is it so hard to get hold of her
whenever we have problems in our ward?” asked the resident. Shelembe said last November,
Zondo promised that electricity would be installed at all households in
Emajikijolweni, Ngongoma, Ekuthuleni and Bijola. She added that all they wanted
was for Zondo to be removed as their coucillor because it was clear that she
had failed in her mandate to serve the people of Ward 8. When contacted by The
Witness on Sunday, Zondo declined to comment.  