Economic Freedom Fighters’ (EFF) leader Julius Malema has launched a renewed attack on Indians and coloureds during a Youth Day event in North West. The firebrand politician said not all South Africans of colour suffered the same during apartheid. “We were not all oppressed the same. Indians had all sorts of resources Africans didn’t have; coloureds as well. The majority of Indians hate Africans. Majority of Indians are racist and we must never be scared to say that. I’m not saying all, I’m saying majority,” Malema told the gathering. Minority Front leader Shameem Rajbansi accused Malema of making “populist statements” to garner votes. “He absolutely does not care about minority rights. He’s an irresponsible leader because he utters these wild statements that are totally unconstitutional,” said Rajbansi. She added that Malema’s utterances were not backed by any proof. “I hope that his statements are an eye opener that he doesn’t care about the Indian votes anymore. He is drunk with the power that he already has.” Chairperson of Pietermaritzburg’s Active Citizens Movement, Roshan Jainath, described Malema as “ideologically bankrupt”. “He doesn’t have a thorough understanding of the race relations in South Africa and what drives people to think whatever they think. He is a populist who always dictates whatever is happening in society to suit his political ideology.” Jainath said Malema’s remarks on Indians have the possibility to incite racial hatred. “What he is doing is very dangerous. He is not assisting to build social cohesion. He is actually destroying it.” South African Minority Rights Equality Movement’s (Samrem) advocate Ashin Singh said Malema was a “political prostitute”. “He has not made a concrete contribution to anything in South Africa and has not worked a single day in his pathetic life.” Singh said Malema was asinine and made comments behind the microphone but was a “coward” who refused to debate with Samrem. This is not the first time Malema has taken aim at Indians. Speaking at the EFF’s fourth anniversary celebration in Durban last August, he lamented that everything strategic, like big tenders, was given to Indians, especially in Durban and KwaZulu-Natal. The EFF subsequently refused to apologise for the comments, saying Indians must confront their own ills and “hatred” of African people. Malema’s comments come just weeks after Nkuleko Mkhize wrote a post on Facebook also targeting Indians. Part of the post read: “I think it is time to show Indians that they are not welcome here in KZN. A new day after Indians go back to India or we will kill them like that girl shot in Chatsworth.” He was presumably referring to an incident during which nine-year-old Sadia Sukhraj was killed. Two cases of crimen injuria were opened against Mkhize. Last month, Edward Zuma was ordered by the Durban’s Equality Court to apologise to all South Africans for his “sell-out” hate speech remarks directed at ministers Pravin Gordhan and Derek Hanekom last year. Zuma was also ordered to pay damages of R60 000.