Wykeham Collegiate pupil Hannah Elliott recently won the SA Cup Mountain Biking Series in Nelspruit and is now number one in her age group in South Africa. The 11-year-old from Clarendon also participated in the ROAG series where she was placed first in her age group and first woman overall. “It all started when my dad bought me a bicycle when I was four years old. I’ve been cycling since then,” she said. Her mother, Claudette Elliott, said she is very proud of her daughter who has worked very hard and has done so well. “She started racing at eight years old when we were attending a birthday party at Cascades.” Elliott said her daughter saw preparations made for the Spur Schools Mountain Bike League and asked if she could join. “I then entered her and she loved it.” With subsequent training she had ended up competing in various other mountain biking events on the KZN and South African calendar. Of her win, Hannah told The Witness the race was very exciting and even though the ride was long, it was worth it. “I am feeling very good. Winning was a dream come true. My friends and family are very happy for me, and that encourages me even more,” she said. Hannah’s mother said while they are proud of their daughter they encourage her to remain humble and appreciate every moment. “For a very long time Hannah did not know she won the KZN series and South African series. We just told her she had won and we were very proud of her. She now obviously knows she’s won the South African series, but we’re not pushing her into anything. “She’s worked really hard this year, and I must say 2018 has been an amazing year for her because when she was in Cape Town, she met her hero Nino Schurter. He signed her shirt, and now she’s won the series,” she said. When speaking about her training schedule and future accomplishments, Hannah said her parents don’t have a rigid training schedule as they want her to enjoy what she does. “My parents don’t push my training schedule, I just train after school. My dream is to now compete in and win the Olympics,” she said.