 The African Bird of Prey Sanctuary’s Shannon
Hoffman recently won the Eco-Angel award for her efforts to conserve the
critically endangered bearded vulture. Hoffman won the award at the Eco-Logic Awards in
Pretoria last week. The Eco-Logic Awards identify individuals, organisations
and communities that help towards creating a sustainable world. Hoffman, the director of the African Bird of Prey
Sanctuary near Camperdown, started the bearded vulture breeding project in 2015
in a bid to save the endangered bird from extinction. The Eco-Angel award is given to an individual
“whose actions have conserved, nurtured or restored the Earth’s life forms,
eco-systems, or natural resources”, as stated on the Eco-Logic award website. Hoffman said there are only 400 bearded vultures
left in the Drakensberg Mountains and her breeding programme is an effort to
save the birds from extinction. She said on Thursday that typically, a male and
female bearded vulture will lay two eggs but take care of and raise only one
chick. “We have the potential to take the second egg from
the nest without affecting the birds or their way of life, and to raise them in
captivity,” said Hoffman.. She said the bearded vultures already in captivity
at the sanctuary were raised using puppets that look like the birds. “It is important that they are raised and see their
own kind,” she said. Hoffman said the vultures lay their eggs high up in
the Drakensberg Mountains and so the project requires them to fly around the
mountains, searching for nests with two eggs. She added that the eggs needed to come from
different nests to keep the genetic pool from shrinking. The programme was still going through its pilot
stage and the first group of bearded vultures they have will be for their
genetic reserve, she said. Their adult female bearded vulture, Lesli — which
means bird of light in Sotho — was the only fully grown bearded vulture in
captivity. The sanctuary also has Mwezi, a three-year-old male. Hoffman said Mwezi was the only male bearded
vulture they had in captivity and the rest were female juveniles.  