A relaxed weekend turned into a disaster for an Imbali homeowner after a municipal truck crashed into her yard on Saturday night. The truck crashed through a brick wall into the yard after the driver lost control of the vehicle, apparently due to brake failure. Homeowner Nonhle Hadebe said she was in her bedroom, and her two children were in the sitting room watching TV when they heard a loud bang and felt the house shake. The shocked family discovered a municipal truck had knocked down their brick wall before rolling down an embankment and damaging a neighbour’s security fence. The family immediately called the police, alleging the truck driver and two other occupants were under the influence of alcohol. “I heard a loud bang and footsteps and shuffling noises outside. When I investigated, I found the vehicle in my yard,” Hadebe said. She said at first she thought that a bomb had exploded. “My children ran into my room scared and they are still recovering from the trauma,” she said. This, said residents, was the fourth such incident in the last two years. Last year a car crashed into one of the houses in the area damaging a wall. When The Witness visited the house on Monday, debris and broken glass were still strewn across the front yard. A family car which was parked outside had also been damaged during the crash. By late Monday, municipal officials who were supposed to visit the family to evaluate the damage had not arrived. The frustrated family said they were sent from pillar to post every time they contacted the municipal offices to enquire about the accident. The Witness sent questions to Msunduzi municipality spokeswoman Thobeka Mafumbatha, who on Monday said she was still waiting on a response from the relevant officials. A lack of perceived action from the municipality has elicited feelings of frustration and anger from the residents, who are now demanding that speed bumps be built along Ndaba and Mphangi roads. A resident, Makhosi Mbanjwa, said two years ago they asked for speed humps to be erected. “We have asked for speed bumps before, but there is always talk. Nobody cares or does anything. “It is extremely dangerous here. There is nowhere safe for our children to play. And even for the grown-ups, we have to cross the road to dispose of the rubbish. Cars are always speeding up and down the road here,” she said. “It has been a long time and we are tired of waiting. We do not want another house to get damaged or worse a person to die!” she added.