Electricity users are
facing a triple whammy, with Eskom announcing the return of load shedding,
Msunduzi Municipality promising a new blitz on defaulters this weekend, and a
new tariff increase on the cards as Nersa gave Eskom the nod to recover a
R32,69 billion shortfall from consumers. On Thursday, it
emerged at a City Hall meeting that despite the continuing billing chaos
causing many residents to receive incorrect bills or even no bills at all, the
City is planning a big disconnection drive. Msunduzi Municipality
on Thursday admitted to problems with the billing system and the accuracy of
statements sent to customers, but says it will not stop its controversial
disconnections. Chief financial
officer Neli Ngcobo told the financial services portfolio committee that there
will be another disconnection drive this weekend targeting defaulting
customers. She said the
disconnections are focusing on debt that is more than 60 days in arrears. DA councillor Ross
Strachan felt that the City is being “forceful” with the residents, saying
there have been problems with the billing system which resulted in outstanding
queries on meters and utility statements. “We haven’t quite
rectified that, but now we are going out and disconnecting where there are
outstanding matters. We are actually inconveniencing our residents,” he said. Ngcobo responded by
saying that in terms of compliance with the credit control policy, the
municipality cannot stop disconnections just because there are queries. “If we stop it’s
going to come back as another audit query [from the auditor-general]. I do
agree that we’ve had challenges in terms of billing and accuracy of our
statements. We are sourcing assistance as we speak because we want to stabilise
everything by month end in preparation for the financial year end,” she
said. She said all the
April bills were accurate but there have been some setbacks since, which she
hopes will be resolved by July as they are currently correcting them. “So it’s safe to say
that over this disconnection weekend there might be a chance that you could be
disconnecting people with outstanding queries with the municipality?” said
Strachan. “Like you said there
have been issues with the billing where you’ve overcharged and it hasn’t been
accurate and months and months have gone by without these issues being
attended,” he said. Ngcobo said in every
organisation customers are disconnected if they are not paying. She said customers
need to come forward with their queries and the City’s offices will be open on
Saturday and Sunday to attend to them. “I cannot say that
just because we have queries we must sit back and we mustn’t disconnect because
the same councillors when the audit is being issued [say] why didn’t we
implement the credit control [policy], and I will need to answer, so
unfortunately I have to balance the two,” she said. ANC councillors
Caiphas Ndawonde and Sandile Dlamini questioned Ngcobo on the consumers that
are not being billed and the 24 000 households that are on the R91 water flat
rate in Vulindlela. They said it is
unfair that some consumers are billed for their consumption and yet others are
enjoying services they are not paying for. “This is happening at
the expense of other consumers who pay on a monthly basis for the services for
water and lights but some are living in luxury houses and they are not even
paying a cent,” said Dlamini. Ngcobo said the
Vulindlela and Edendale meters are not being read because they are clustered.
She said funding is required to separate them. The areas also do not
have street names. She said the matter has been brought to council on several
occasions for more than three years but it has not been resolved. “The question is, are
we going to allow those people to continue enjoying those services and for how
long?” Ngcobo asked the committee. 