 City councillors were roasted on Wednesday over their failure to
attend to a crucial meeting and warned that their actions could result in the
council being placed under administration. It was the second time in a row
that Msunduzi councillors failed to reach a quorum for a full council meeting
that had to deal with a host of urgent issues. These included a report on an
investigation into corruption allegations made against the City manager, Sizwe
Hadebe, and his alleged “voice note scandal”. Visibly irritated Speaker Jabu
Ngcobo did not mince her words, saying those councillors who won’t attend
meetings are inviting the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs (Cogta) to place the City under administration. She was forced to cancel Wednesday’s
meeting because they missed a quorum of 40 by just one councillor. “We are inviting Section 139
[for a municipality to be placed under administration] because it means that
the council is not functioning.” Mayor Themba Njilo also
expressed his disappointment that yet another meeting had collapsed due to a
failure to meet the quorum. “As the head of the
municipality ngikhathele (I’m tired). Failing is not in my DNA
so seeing that things are getting worse — it’s really getting out of hand now.
After this meeting I’m going to get legal advice on what to do to get this
municipality to function as expected,” he said. Last week’s special council
meeting was also cancelled when more than 32 councillors did not attend. This
was repeated on Wednesday when only 39 councillors, including Ngubo, Njilo and
the ANC chief whip Truman Magubane turned up. Only 26 councillors sent their
apologies out of the 42 absentees. Ngubo said she will write to
the 42 councillors who were absent “so that councillors know where we are
heading to if they continue behaving like this”. Ngubo also had harsh words for
those who arrived late, saying there is no excuse for not being punctual for a
meeting they have known about since last Wednesday. “Next time we call another
meeting councillors must drop everything and be here before 9 am,” she said. ANC councillor Mtuza Mkhize
proposed that Magubane be allowed an opportunity to phone the councillors who
were absent and ask if they could come immediately. This was supported by his peers
across political parties but the suggestion had to be abandoned as it was in
breach of the municipal rules of order. Veteran DA councillor Bill
Lambert said what is happening in Msunduzi is unprecedented. “We’ve got a municipal manager
who is more absent than he is present. “He has not faced this city
council once since that scandal of his [alleged] voice misdemeanour went viral.
He is a walking disaster and he is pulling this City down,” he said. Lambert appealed to Njilo to
save Msunduzi and not to go down in history “as the mayor over the collapse of
the capital city of KwaZulu-Natal”. The DA’s Shawn Adkins described
the behaviour of councillors who are deliberately not attending meetings as a
disgrace. He said it showed their lack of a sense of accountability to the
people of Msunduzi. The DA also suggested that
Ngubo should consider charging the councillors who were absent. “We need to find out what is
going on because maybe we now have a split council and these councillors are
reporting to a different mayor and a different council,” said the IFP’s
Thinasonke Ntombela. The cancellation of Wednesday’s
meeting cost Msunduzi R13 500 in wasteful expenditure as lunch for 81
councillors had already been ordered from the service providers. As part of its cost containment
strategy, Msunduzi now only caters at meetings that are expected to be more
than five hours long. Hadebe
says his presence not needed City manager Sizwe Hadebe said
he did not understand the context of what Councillor Bill Lambert had said. “I’m not a member of council
and I was represented in the meeting. My absence does not dictate whether the
meeting sits or not. As a senior councillor who has served many terms, he
should know that. “I personally respect
councillor Lambert greatly because of the contribution he has made in the City
including serving at senior levels. “But I think that he is doing
himself and his constituency disservice and threatening his legacy by throwing
potshots at the administration. “As a member of council, he’s
duty bound to propose remedies in areas of concern because we all have the best
interest of the city at heart. “Instead of coming up with
solutions, he involves himself in mud slinging, an act that is not befitting of
his stature,” he said. He said Lambert understands
processes that need to be followed to voice bona fide concerns
and recommendations but did not follow those.  