Two cases of crimen injuria have been opened against a man who made anti-Indian comments on Facebook. One of the cases was opened by Msunduzi Municipality ANC PR councillor Rachel Soobiah at the Mountain Rise police station at the weekend. The second case was opened by ANC stalwart and prominent businessman Visvin Reddy at the Malvern police station. Provincial police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said she could not comment further as the investigations were at a sensitive stage. The anti-Indian Facebook post by Nkuleko Mkhize saying “We will kill them and they should go back to India”, has been making the rounds on social media. He also wrote: “I think it is time to show Indians that they are not welcome here in KZN. A new day after Indians goes back to India or we will kill them like that girl shot in Chatsworth.” Mkhize has since deleted his Facebook account. Speaking to The Witness on Tuesday, Soobiah said: “Even if we are not sure who he is, the fact that there is a face to it, means he must be found and held accountable.” Soobiah called for KZN Premier Willies Mchunu and crime intelligence to find Mkhize. “Just like we did to Penny Sparrow when she made racial comments, the same thing must apply to Mkhize as well. “We are born in South Africa, this is our home. We do not need people like Mkhize to divide us.” Political parties have also condemned the statement. IFP MP Narend Singh said it was unacceptable to call for the killing of anyone or any race. “[This] shows his clear lack of understanding of our country’s political history. The IFP will take strong action against Mkhize. We will make an announcement in this regard this week.” Premier Mchunu also condemned the “callous content” of the post. “Steps are under way to identify the perpetrator and do the necessary to prosecute the person/s involved,” said Mchunu. He urged citizens to desist from circulating divisive messages on social media. “Fake news, in particular, serves only to destabilise our society. Across all our communities we must constantly work to deepen non-racialism, build unity and fight crime. We must not allow a small destructive element to divide our communities,” he said.