A woman who was stabbed and set alight in her home in the France area on Wednesday stumbled out of the house in flames and when collapsing called out the name of her attacker. This is according to a relative of the murder victim, who spoke to The Witness on condition of anonymity on Thursday. The homeowner, Thokozani Kunene (39) was killed and her brother Khehla Sibisi (37) is still in hospital. The siblings were attacked by unknown intruders in their home in the early hours of Wednesday morning. The assailants also kidnapped one of Kunene’s tenants, Noxolo Magoso (28) who was renting a backroom with her boyfriend, Thulani Zimu, and is still missing. Kunene and Sibisi were taken to Edendale hospital where Kunene —who was also stabbed — died. When The Witness visited the house on Thursday, all that remained was rubble and ashes. Kunene’s VW Polo Classic was also destroyed in the fire. A relative, who asked not to be named in fear of victimisation, told The Witness that Kunene had spoken the name of the attacker before she died. “She came out of the house in flames and before falling to the ground she told people who were already there the name of one of the people who attacked them.” The family said they suspected that the person behind the attack was a disgruntled ex-tenant that Kunene had evicted in March for allegedly dealing in drugs. “Thoko [Kunene] had reported the man to the police after he had threatened her and chased her around her yard with a gun, but the police were too slow and nothing ever came from her reporting the person,” said the relative. The relative said they suspect the attackers jumped over the fence and woke up Sibisi, who was sleeping alone in a rondawel near the gate, and forced him to open the main house where Kunene and an elderly woman were sleeping. The woman said the elderly woman had escaped and sought help from neighbours, but when they returned, the house was already in flames and the assailants had already left, stealing a silver Toyota Hilux bakkie, and taking Noxolo Magoso with them. “We think they might have heard the tenant [Magoso] speaking on her phone and believed she was calling the police so they took her with them. “They [Magoso and her boyfriend] had only just been living here for a week or two and this happened. I hope she is safe and is found soon,” she said. Zimu, Magoso’s boyfriend, said his “spirit was troubled” as his girlfriend is still missing. He said he was at work when Magoso was abducted and had spent most of Thursday with the police trying to help them find his girlfriend. “I have told her family and they are also very distraught. I have since moved out of the backroom as the doors are broken and it’s not safe. I just hope they haven’t hurt her and that we find her soon,” he said. Zimu said Magoso, the mother of an eight-year-old girl, is average in height, petite and light in complexion. He said she was wearing a short black and white skirt with a red hoodie and had braids in her hair tied up as a bun. He pleaded with anyone with information that can help find Magoso to contact the police. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Kholeka Mhlongo said police are investigating a case of murder, house robbery, arson, attempted murder and kidnapping. Mhlongo said the stolen Toyota bakkie had been recovered in Sweetwaters on Wednesday afternoon. “We urge the community members to assist with more information which might lead to the arrest of the suspects, who are currently on the run,” said Mhlongo.