The man who ran over four Comrades Marathon volunteers at the weekend has voluntarily handed himself over to police. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed on Tuesday that the man handed himself over at the Pietermaritzburg SAPS Accident Unit. “The man faces several (possible) charges including hit-and-run, failure to stop after an accident, negligent driving and failure to ascertain injuries after an accident.” Zwane said it was unclear when the man would be appearing in court. The Witness established that the man was released after making a statement to police. Read: Volunteer still in ICU; cops seek driver An informed source said the usual procedure would be followed in the case where once the investigation was finalised, the matter is referred to the KZN Director of Public Prosecutions for a decision. The man will thereafter be summoned to appear in court. Johan Doubell (51), from Cleland, was severely injured when he and three other volunteers were run over by a blue bakkie speeding down Polly Shortts at about 4 am on Sunday while they were setting up a water point. The other volunteers involved in the accident sustained lesser injuries than Doubell. Erika Kapp, Doubell’s fiancée, told The Witness on Tuesday that she was “pleased and grateful” after learning that a person had handed himself over to the police. “I’d also like to thank Captain Dolf Otto of the Accident Unit and his team for assisting us with all of this.” Kapp said Doubell was due to undergo surgery on Wednesday. “Johan will most probably have reconstructive eye surgery on the bone around his right eye and another operation on his left leg,” she said. Merrywynn Pieterse, who was also run over by the bakkie on Sunday morning, said she was not severely injured but was still “traumatised and in pain”. “It was just the force of the impact that flung me to the ground leaving me with a few bruises and scratches,” she said. Pieterse said she was “glad that the man had been found”. “I was devastated when I heard that the driver had fled the scene. Justice can now be done because a lot of lives were affected by the incident,” she said. Another victim of the accident, Sharlene Zulth from Cleland, told The Witness on Tuesday that she has not been able to sleep ever since the incident occurred. “I was at the doctor today and he booked me off for two weeks. I will be admitted to hospital on Thursday because the physical pain and trauma from the accident took a huge knock at me. “I haven’t been able to sleep because I just remember the man who was severely injured lying down next to me crying in agony. The bakkie had knocked me on the side and then went straight into the man. Had I been inches to the side I would also be badly injured. “My shoulder and back hurt and I am still shaking from the trauma,” she said. Zulth said she was also happy that the perpetrator had been caught. “I hope this man is put in jail and that justice takes its course,” she said. The third volunteer who was hurt in the accident did not want to comment on the incident.