A Comrades marathon volunteer is in a critical condition in hospital after a horror hit-and-run accident as he was setting up a water point in Ashburton early of Sunday morning. Production manager for a chemical company Johan Doubell (51), from Cleland, is in a critical condition at St Anne’s hospital after being run over by a bakkie on Sunday. The bakkie driver fled the scene and an appeal for information on the identity of the driver has been made. Johan Doubell’s fiancée, Erika Kapp, said they were setting up their water stand at the bottom of Polly Shortts at Ashburton when Doubell went to fetch some boxes. “A light blue bakkie came speeding up and hit two women before it swerved into him. It ran over him, reversed and then sped off.” “He had a knee replacement a year ago on his right leg, and
that knee is now broken in five places and the doctor said he may have to
amputate it if they can’t save it. The left leg is fully broken, and he might
be going into surgery in two days. My fiancée also has broken ribs, a cracked
skull, his cheek is broken and his lung collapsed,” she said. Kapp said the family is shocked as they thought the area was
safe and there were a lot of people standing in the street already at that
time. “I can’t believe he didn’t even stop to say sorry. He just
kept going. It is clear that the person knew the area very well because he just
disappeared,” she said. Bes Bezuidenhout of the Moths told The Witness that Doubell,
a Moth himself, was a volunteer at the Moths water point at the bottom of Polly
Shortts. He said the Moths were devastated by what had happened. “We
are appealing for anyone who may have seen the bakkie to come forward. We are
pleading for any information that may help us to get the culprit,” he said. Netcare 911 spokesperson Shawn Herbst said the accident
occurred at around 4 am. Comrades Marathon spokesperson Delaine Cools said a
statement will be released today as Comrades Marathon Association was still
conducting its own research on the incident. Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said a case of reckless and
negligent driving was opened at Alexandra police station.