Former president Jacob Zuma’s family have denied that he has links with a proposed anti-Ramaphosa political party, but members of the group insist they held talks with him. “We definitely consulted the former president. His input on a wide range of issues from land to unemployment helped us arrive at the decision to investigate the possibility of launching a new party,” said Regi Ngcobo, a member of the lobby group’s co-ordinating team. Ngcobo was reacting to a statement issued by Zuma’s son, Edward, on Thursday afternoon distancing his father from the group. “I wish to categorically distance former president Jacob Zuma from these lunatics, who want fame at all costs ... we are all disciplined members of the ANC and we will forever remain loyal to it,” he said. “The former president remains a committed member of the ANC. He will be campaigning for the ANC for the 2019 general elections and for the local government elections thereafter.” However, Ngcobo, who said the new party would be launched as early as the middle of June, was adamant that Edward was not speaking on behalf of his father. “As far as we know, he is expressing his own personal views. We have never dealt with him, the person we are consulting with is the former president and not him,” said Ngcobo. The lobby group is consulting traditional leaders, the minibus taxi industry and other sectors of society to garner more views on the launch of the new party. “The consultations we are currently engaging in will give us an idea around the main demands of people on the ground. “However, what we have established so far is the fact that people are not happy with the direction which President Cyril Ramaphosa is taking the country. “People on the ground don’t feel that he is the right person to oversee the implementation of radical economic transformation programmes such as the expropriation of land with compensation,” he said. Ngcobo, who is a former Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) KwaZulu-Natal regional chairperson, mentioned former EFF provincial co-ordinator Nathi Phewa and Mpumalanga province businessman Frank Fakude as some of the figures behind the initiative. The group’s announcement comes against the backdrop of growing speculation that Zuma supporters, who include Durban’s controversial “mafia” business forum Delangokubona, some funeral practitioners, and members of the minibus taxi industry, were planning to take advantage of the cracks within the ANC caused by Zuma’s axing.