Residents and motorists in Bergville ducked flying bullets on Monday when a gang of 10 heavily armed robbers unleashed terror in the CBD. By the time everything had calmed down, a 13-year-old schoolboy was dead and two others injured in the robbery at the F3 Supermarket on Kingsway Road. KZN police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said the attackers had held the store owner, a Chinese national, at gunpoint. They looted the shop’s tills, making off with an undisclosed amount of cash. It was reported that the robbers had arrived in two vehicles, a white double-cab Ford Ranger and a blue VW Polo, around 4.30 pm. The men, who were seen in a video clip circulated on social media after the attack, wore balaclavas and were armed with R5 rifles and 9mm pistols. A police source, who asked not to be named for fear of reprisals, said the killers fired multiple shots in every direction before entering the shop, and also stopped a Toyota Fortuner. They are allegedly searched the occupants of the Toyota Fortuner, demanding firearms. The assailants then proceeded to the shop where they shot a 27-year-old security guard who was inside a security tower at the supermarket, after which they dragged him into the store. The second casualty was a security guard who was standing at the door. He was also shot in the face. The police source said the teenager from Betany Village, who was still in his school uniform, spotted the assailants as they walked in and ran. It is understood that the teen, who took refuge inside a toilet, was shot through the door. Mbhele said during the robbery, the men also took rifles belonging to the security company before fleeing the scene in their getaway vehicles. They are believed to have fled towards the R74 road to Harrismith. Mbhele said officers were following several leads. No arrests had been made by on Tuesday. A resident, who asked to remain anonymous, said she was on her way home when she witnessed the “mayhem”. “I was driving down Kingsway and the vehicles in front of me just stopped. “People started running. At the time I didn’t know what was going on but I could hear the gunshots,” she said. The resident said she then received a frantic phone-call from one of her close friends telling her that shots were being fired close to her husband’s shop. She said while she was stuck and scared in her car, the gunshots continued for about 15 minutes. “They were just shooting whatever they could. Luckily, my husband was not in the shop at the time.”