Three-time Comrades Marathon champion Bongmusa Mthembu jets
off to Croatia next week with the aim of securing the title in the super-tough
100 km World Championships. The Bulwer-born Pietermaritzburg resident finished second in
the event two years ago in Spain and wishes to go one position higher this
time, just three months after securing the Comrades title and proving his
credentials as a star act once again. He is among three Midlands-based ultra-distance runners in a
nine-person team representing South Africa in the mighty race in the Croatian
town of Sveti Martin na Muri, outside Zagreb, next Saturday, September 8. Mthembu will be joined by two local Arthur Ford teammates
Nkosinathi Duma and Thuso Mosiea in the European challenge. “I don’t want to put too much pressure on myself or the
team. But the training has been good. I have no injuries,’’ Mthembu told The
Witness. In 2016, he completed the race in 6:24:05, behind Japan’s
Hideaki Yamauchi, who won gold in 6:18:22. But Mthembu successfully broke one
of the longest standing national records in the books held by nine-time
Comrades champion Bruce Fordyce. Now, the 35-year-old runner will no doubt be expected to
once again create national pride in long-distance running by challenging for
another podium spot. “It’s always an honour to represent the country and I speak
for everyone in saying that, and I have faith in everyone in the team that we
will all do as we have been told in training to hopefully achieve the target
set for us,’’ he said. After the country was represented by a men’s only team in
2016, Athletics South Africa (ASA) have decided to include four women. They are experienced Comrades runners Salome Cooper, Fikile
Mbuthuma, Deanne Horn and Lisa Collett. The other two men in the team are Claude Moshiywa, also a
former Comrades champion, and Best Ngwenya, both from Nedbank club. Added Mthembu: “The environment is obviously different there
and we don’t know what to expect, but I’m sure everyone is excited and want to
do well. We just have to stick to the coaches’ instructions. But I think we are
all healthy and ready for the event. “We’ve just come from the Comrades Marathon and ASA made
sure that everyone is checked in terms of fitness to get us ready for the
event.’’ Meanwhile, athletics fans will also be eager to see how
Caster Semenya and company perform in the finals of the money-filled IAAF
Diamond League in Zurich on Wednesday night and Brussels on Thursday. World champions Semenya and Luvo Manyonga lead the South
African charge, with Semenya targeting her third straight Diamond League title
over 800 m. Manyonga will be favoured in the long jump, where he is
accompanied by compatriot Ruswahl Samaai. SA ATHLETES IN DIAMOND LEAGUE FINALS: Thursday in Zurich: 8.04 pm — 400 m men Pieter Conradie 8.13 pm — 800 m women Caster Semenya 8.40 pm — 100 m women Carina Horn 8.45 pm — Long jump men Luvo Manyonga, Ruswahl Samaai 9.02 pm — 400 m hurdles women Wenda Nel 9.11 pm — 200 m men Luxolo Adams 9.44 pm — 400m hurdles men 
Cornel Fredericks Friday in Brussels: 8.54 pm — 100 m men Akani Simbine •
nondumiso.zakwe@witness.co.za