There are 31 KwaZulu-Natal properties, including farms, on a list of 190 earmarked for expropriation without compensation, according to Afri­Forum. The civil rights organisation on Sunday published a list of 190 properties, which is more than the 139 that the ANC announced to have been targeted. According to the list, the most farms have been targeted in North West (with 32 properties), followed by KZN (31). Afriforum said in a statement that although the list is confidential, it had obtained a document being circulated in the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform as a list of farms that will serve as “test cases”. It does not contain the details of the 139 farms, but of 190 “properties”. Deputy CEO of Afriforum Ernst Roets said: “We expect many a land owner will be shocked to learn that their property has been identified for this purpose.” Department of Rural Development and Land Reform spokesperson Phuti Mabelebele said she could not comment and that a statement about the list would be issued on Monday morning. DA chief whip John Steenhuisen said the 139 farms belong to farmers who previously rejected offers under the “willing buyer, willing seller model”. “While some compensation will be offered, the value will be determined by the valuer-general. Expropriation notices could be issued if the offer is rejected, and then tested in court. Reports indicate this process is already under way, again bypassing parliamentary processes,” he said. He said the ANC’s attempt to undermine the recently concluded Constitutional Review Committee’s (CRC) land hearings by running a parallel process through its branches to influence the outcome of the hearings “is dangerous and undermines ... Parliament”. Steenhuisen said the ANC’s proposal to amend the Constitution to allow for land expropriation without compensation is a “desperate attempt” to bolster its election campaign. The CEO of Kwanalu, Sandy la Marque, said the organisation is not aware of an official release of a “list” of farms for expropriation. By law the expropriation of land requires a specific legal process, in the framework of the current Constitution and judicial process. She said Kwanalu believes it will be unfair and unacceptable to target farmers — who use land productively — by taking away their property without compensating them. She said farmers should stay calm until the validity of the list is confirmed by the department. “It’s the courts’ duty to interpret legislation and the Constitution.” Number of properties per province apparently earmarked for expropriation: North West 32 KwaZulu-Natal 31 Free State 29 Eastern Cape 29 Mpumalanga 24 Gauteng 21 Northern Cape 18 Limpopo 9 Western Cape 2