Sharks coach Robert
du Preez believes the future of his new enterprising utility back Aphelele
Fassi is bright and the player could even end up being counted among the top
men in the country if he keeps working hard. Fassi (20), who
possesses the ability to make a switch to wing or fullback without hassle,
kicked off his senior career with the Durban franchise on a speedy note when
the Sharks defeated the Blue Bulls 26-10 in the Currie Cup on Saturday. Fassi played only 20
minutes after being introduced in the second half, but he still managed to make
sure that the people who watched the clash would remember his name. The youngster from
King Williams Town in the Eastern Cape replaced Kobus van Wyk and scored his
first try in the senior team with his first touch. The Dale College old
boy later scored another try, but it didn’t count because the TMO ruled that he
had received a forward pass. “He is a special kid
and he’s very talented,” said coach Du Preez about Fassi. “We play him on the
wing but he is actually a fullback. It’s great to have a guy like that in your
set-up, a young guy. He has to keep working hard. “Hopefully he will
get a start soon. I’m not concerned about starting him, at all. He can start
any time.” Fassi’s first stint
with the Du Preez-coached outfit was two weeks ago in a friendly match against
the French side Bordeaux Begles at Moses Mabhida Stadium. The youngster also
gave the French a hard time with his amazing pace and dangerous skills. He matriculated from
Dale College in the Eastern Cape last year and immediately joined the Sharks
academy. Another player who
shone in the clash against the Bulls was Juan Schoeman, who is set to be a
principal prop in the Currie Cup. Tendai “Beast”
Mtawarira was the first choice for the number one jersey in the Super Rugby but
the Currie Cup provides Schoeman with a chance to grow his career. “He is brilliant.
Juan had a great Super Rugby season and he just continued with that form. He is
a guy who can play 80 minutes; obviously, in the Currie Cup we only have one
prop,” said Du Preez. The Sharks’ next
assignment is in Bloemfontein against the Free State Cheetahs on Saturday at 2 pm. Du Preez will be
hoping that before they travel to Free State his side will be sure about the
need to improve their conversion rate. “Our conversion rate
was not that great, so that’s something that we definitely have to work on. “We
do create a lot of opportunities,” said the coach.  FIXTURES Friday Pumas vs Western
Province — 6.30 pm Saturday Cheetahs vs Sharks — 2 pm Bulls vs Lions — 4 pm.