Parking your car in some parts of Pietermaritzburg is
becoming a task for the brave-hearted as motorists have to negotiate a new
trend amongst some car guards who intimidate and threaten motorists who don’t
have a rand to spare. Last Friday night, I had just parked outside Scottsville
Mall along Alan Paton Avenue when a relatively young car guard knocked on my
window and instructed me to roll my window down. He asked that I pay him his tip for watching my car upfront,
before I even go into the mall because “most motorists have a tendency of
sneaking off without paying”. “I also don’t want anything less than R2,” he said. I didn’t know what to say. He wasn’t rude or aggressive. I
told him I did not have any cash on me and said I would see him when I return. His response: “Okay, but just know you’re going into the
mall at your own risk. You might come back and find your tyres slashed.” I
drove off. Another local resident, Nolu­thando Mbata, said she has been
sworn at on numerous occasions. “They help you to park even if you don’t need any assistance
and when you drive off without paying they become aggressive and start
swearing. “This has happened to me on many occasions and it’s not just
the guys in the city centre, even the decent looking car guards at Hayfields,”
said Mbata. A Chase Valley woman, who asked not to be named, said two
weeks ago she was parked outside St Anne’s Hospital and gave the car guard R1
as that was the only money she had on her at that moment. “He asked me what he was supposed to do with R1.” She said on a previous occasion she felt guilty about not
tipping the car guard and decided to give him the only 50c coin she had. “He threw it back in my face,” she said. The women said car guards were slowly becoming “entitled”
and seemed to have forgotten that some people rarely carry cash.  A car guard says Wiseman Msane, a car guard stationed along Alan Paton
Avenue, said it is very unfortunate that they are being painted with one brush
because of the attitudes of some of his colleagues. Msane said he has also endured many insults from motorists. “Some motorists are racist and are inconsiderate. I don’t
mind being tipped anything from R1 upwards, but some motorists give us as
little as 20c. What can you do with 20c?” he asked. Msane said he believes that the job he does is important and
very necessary. “Whenever a person parks their car here I have to monitor which
shop they go into in case something happens to their car. If someone else
smashes into their car or scratches it I have to run and get the owner quickly
and people still don’t appreciate our presence. “The rude people are those who just get into their cars and
drive off. I really do appreciate it when someone tells me that they have no
cash on them and thank me for watching over their car instead of just driving
off — that’s just rude,” he said. Msane admitted that some of his colleagues are aggressive
and feel entitled as they are desperate to feed their drug addiction. “I guess every job comes with its ups and downs. Sometimes I
don’t get anything and sometimes people tip me with R30, not everyone is the
same,” he said.  The City Says Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said
that car guards working without a Private Security Industry Regulatory
Authority (Prisa) qualification are breaking the law according to the Prisa
Act. “A distinction is generally made between formal and informal
car guards. Formal car guards are co-ordinated by agencies working on behalf of
shopping centres, and provide their services at shopping centre parking lots.
Informal car guards operate mainly in the city centre, where they guard cars
parked on the streets. It should be noted that in terms of the National Road
Traffic Act 2000 and the Business Act 1991 (Act 71 of 1991), informal car
guarding is an illegal but tolerated activity, provided it complies with the
Prisa Act,” she said. Mafumbatha said that at the moment the municipality did not
have any designated person tasked with dealing with the registration and
monitoring of car guards. However, the Msunduzi Public Safety (Traffic and
Security) division, with its limited legal force, manages the car guards by
enforcing the municipality’s Public Open Space Nuisance By-Laws. She added that Msunduzi’s officers deal with complaints and
reports pertaining to illegal car guards and encouraged the public to report
such matters to this number: 0800 033 911.  Our readers say Commenting on The Witness Facebook page, Denesh Govender
said car guards were “usually always grateful”. “Maybe its because we always treat them with respect and
give them a proper tip. These people stand and guard your car in blazing heat,
pouring rain and freezing cold temperatures. The least one can do is give them
a respectable tip, I would never dare give a person rendering a service
anything less than R8, the price of a loaf of bread. It is an insult,” said
Govender. Aleck de Beer said car guards were hard working individuals
come rain or shine and they have become a necessity.