Police say an arrest is imminent after an outraged father allegedly killed a woman in retaliation after an accident that claimed the life of his five-year-old son. KwaZulu-Natal Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) employee Thembelihle Mkhize (38), and another colleague were driving through Msinga on their way to Dundee when they were involved in an accident which resulted in the death of the child. The Cogta employees were based at Dundee. Police said the incident happened on the R33 main road near Mawozeni area. Mkhize was allegedly shot in retaliation for the accident by the boy’s father, while her colleague who was driving the car managed to flee the scene to report the matter at Msinga police station. In a statement, the department said the pair had stopped the car as they were still in shock and trying to get help when they were confronted by the outraged man. “He reportedly threatened the pair with violence, which resulted in the male employee managing to run away, in the process escaping a hail of bullets fired at him, while the woman, trapped in the vehicle, was shot dead on the scene,” said KZN Cogta MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube. Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said no arrests had been made yet and that police had opened a case of culpable homicide and murder. Dube-Ncube said the incident was a “horrible tragedy”. “The death of a child is sad and very disturbing news to all of us. It is also deeply distressing that a defenceless woman was brutally murdered in what appears to be an act of retaliation. We send our heartfelt condolences to all the affected families who have lost their relatives in this tragic situation. “Equally, we strongly condemn the acts of violence and taking the law into their own hands,” said Dube-Ncube. The boy’s grandmother told The Witness on Monday that the family were shattered. She said residents who witnessed the accident said the vehicle, which she said was speeding, ploughed into the boy, who was walking home with his siblings. The Grade R pupil was declared dead on the scene. She said being at the scene was too “traumatic”. She described her grandson as a smart and loving boy. Ngome ward councillor Zwakushiwo Ndlovu condemned the murder of Mkhize. “The death of a child was tragic but I do not think that the two workers had set out to kill this child,” said Ndlovu.