At the same time as friends mourned the suicide of Rhodes
University student Khensani Maseko last weekend, a UKZN student who was also
raped earlier this year was in hospital recovering from her own attempt to kill
herself. The 19-year-old Pietermaritzburg student, who may not be
named, said on Friday she has attempted to take her own life on numerous
occasions, and was discharged from hospital on Wednesday after her most recent
attempt. She said she was raped by a fellow student, whom she had
regarded as a friend, on the morning of March 4 while attending a birthday
party in Cato Ridge. She said that last week’s suicide attempt was triggered by
seeing her rapist on campus when he was supposed to have been suspended. She
saw that her “attacker was back on campus and was roaming around quite freely
and pompously”. She told The Witness that she was mistreated by the police
and health practitioners when she initially reported the matter. She said only after The Witness published an article about
the rape on May 10, did the university’s Investigations Unit call in all the
students who attended the party to give their statements. The accused was also
required to make a statement in his defence. Read: Sexual assault victim believes her drink was spiked at party She said she was not sure what the findings were but
confirmed that the accused was suspended from the university just before the
start of the first semester exams. However, he is apparently in violation of
his suspension conditions and is still attending classes this semester. “I was told that the university has taken measures to inform
the accused of the consequences of his violation of his suspension conditions
and has also [instructed] campus security to remove him from campus,” she said. The young woman said the university had offered her
counselling and also hired an attorney to assist her in bringing a civil action
against both the police and the district surgeon for their handling of the rape
matter, and criminal action against the accused. Speaking about the Rhodes University student Khensani
Maseko, who committed suicide last Friday after she was raped by her boyfriend
in May, the UKZN student said it was “quite ironic as I was hospitalised last
weekend for a suicide attempt that was unsuccessful”. She said seeing the accused on campus had set her back
tremendously. “It made me feel very unsafe and this triggered a great
sense of despondency that led to me attempting to kill myself to escape this
pain that came flooding in when I saw him. I really do relate with the plight
of Khensani. “To see the person who raped you roaming freely, to face his
many friends on campus everyday who give me dirty looks … that really hurts.
And it contributes tremendously to the sense of loneliness and helplessness one
experiences when you see very few that sympathise with you and are willing to
believe your story.” The student said Maseko died a lonely death. “She was misunderstood, her cries for help fell on deaf
ears. Support for her wasn’t availed with the kind of urgency that was needed. “And those are the kind of things that push a rape survivor
to take her life. I’ve been there too and I know how she [felt]. It’s just
God’s grace that I have failed the numerous suicide attempts to silence my pain
after I was raped,” she said. The student said she was glad to be alive after her attempt
on her own life failed. “What happened to Khensani could’ve happened to me too. The
sooner people realise that a cry for help is not an attention-seeking tactic,
the more lives of rape survivors will be saved. “May her death be a wake-up call to all universities, to
ordinary citizens, the SAPS and hospitals, that our women suffer in silence
because rape cases are not taken seriously,” she said. University seeks justice Normah Zondo, UKZN’s acting spokesperson, said the
university remained fully committed to pursuing all avenues to ensure the
successful prosecution both internally and externally of the matter, and to
ensure that the complainant in this matter obtains appropriate justice. “To this end, in May 2018, the university immediately barred
the accused from all academic activities. He was only allowed on campus to
write his June examinations, under close security supervision,” said Zondo. She said the complainant was required to testify in a
student disciplinary hearing against the accused. “It was not possible to set the matter down for a hearing
due to the complainant being indisposed. “Note that it is important that this
hearing be held at a point when the complainant is available to testify. We
hope that this will be possible within the next month.” Zondo added that the university management together with the
proctor were doing everything possible to progress and finalise this matter. Khensani maseko laid to rest Rhodes student Khensani Maseko (pictured) was buried on
Thursday, Women’s Day, after committing suicide following being raped,
allegedly by her boyfriend, in May. Prior to her death last Friday, 23-year-old Maseko took to
Instagram, posting: “No one deserves to be raped” along with the date of her
birth and the date of the post — which was the same day she died. After the
news of her death, she started trending on social media as people posted
condolence messages and called for the perpetrator be arrested. On Thursday, mourners gathered at the Nasrec Memorial
Cemetery in Johannesburg where she was laid to rest. In attendance, among
others, was Minister of Police Bheki Cele, Rhodes University vice-chancellor
Sizwe Mabizela and university student leaders. Her mother said she was an example to many in her family and
community. “I want to thank God for the memories we shared. I don’t know how I
am going to carry on without you, but I trust God to help me through this
tough, confusing time in my life.”