EFF leader Julius Malema on Thursday tore into ANC regional political heavyweight Mthandeni Dlungwane and ANC councillors in Msunduzi. Malema accused Dlungwane, who is the regional chairperson of the disbanded ANC Moses Mabhida regional executive committee, of grinding service delivery to a halt at Msunduzi through corruption. Dlungwane is also the MEC for the Department of Education. Speaking during an EFF Women’s Day commemoration in Caluza on Thursday, Malema cited the living conditions of residents of Sakha informal settlement in Mkondeni as an example of where he said services had ground to a halt. Malema said the residents of the informal settlement were unlikely to get electricity, water and houses while the ANC was still in power. “In this municipality you must forget about service delivery. There is a guy called Mthandeni Dlungwane. He is the most corrupt young man. “He is untouchable and is related to [former president Jacob] Zuma. They have institutionalised corruption in this municipality. “When children want bursaries in Msunduzi, ANC councillors ask for sex. You will not get jobs, bursaries or houses if you do not sleep with them,” he said. Over 1 000 EFF supporters packed the Caluza Sports Ground on Thursday to listen to Malema, who arrived to loud cheers and ululation. The outspoken EFF leader criticised churches and traditional leaders, whom he accused of isolating women. “There are churches where women worship separate from men. Women are not allowed to wear trousers in those churches or their Brazilian hair. Why are we not challenging that? There are no holy cows here,” he said. He said traditional leaders should stop refusing access to land to single women. “They say if you are a woman, you must have a child or get married before you can get land. But why? Men are given land irrespective of whether they are married or not. They forget that most of these are irresponsible and will not use that land to feed their families. “Once you give land to a woman, you know that children will be fed. Women are the people who are the working land, that is why under EFF leadership each woman will get one hectare of land.” Malema said he did not understand why convicted women-beater Mduduzi Manana was still part of the ANC’s highest decision making body — the national executive committee. “So [President Cyril] Ramaphosa is addressing a Women’s Day event today [yesterday] and he is going to come back and sit next to Manana? He has resigned from Parliament but he is still part of the ANC because in the ANC they take everything. “We want this Manana. He must come to EFF headquarters and we will teach him a lesson,” he said.