The fed up community of Mbutshane, near Hilton, have decided
to fence off an illegal dumping site near their residential area after cleaning
up the area. Fano Nkala, a community member, told The Witness that they
stopped reporting the illegal dump to uMngeni Municipality after they allegedly
spotted municipal vehicles also dumping trees and cables at the illegal dump
situated on Knoll Drive in Hilton. “We have had this problem for the past five years now. We
have reported it so many times but nothing ever happens,” he said. Nkala said neighbouring businesses and houses disposed of
waste including baby diapers, electric cables, building rubble, household
waste, pipes, trees and grass at that site. “This place is now infested by wild pigs, snakes and has
become a nest for vagrants and criminals. Our homes are just below the dump. We
inhale all this dirt and it makes our children sick,” he said. Another irate community member, Bongani Ngcobo, said last
year his “treasured” Hereford bull was killed after being bitten by a snake
near the dump site. “The rats at the dump attract snakes which are a danger to
community members and to our livestock,” he said. Ngcobo said they will burn all the waste, get a grader to
move the waste and then fence off the area to prevent anyone from dumping there
again. “We have been cleaning up this dump for years now and we are
tired.” Ngcobo said when they tried to get in touch with the owner
of the land, they were told he was overseas. “We want to make it very clear that we are not stealing or
grabbing his land. We are not even affiliated with any political party. We are
just fed up so we will fence the area and will only remove the fence when the
owner takes responsibility for it,” he said. Thando Mgaga, uMngeni Municipality spokesperson, said their
waste management division was only recently made aware of the illegal dumping. “Upon inspection it was established that the illegal dumpers
mostly dumped garden refuse. Our inspection did not find the materials
mentioned such as electricity cables,” he said. Mgaga said a plan was drafted and that a TLB and a tipper
truck was being sent in to clear and dispose of the illegally dumped garden
refuse and any other illegally dumped waste. “Also it is untrue that municipal vehicles have been used to
illegally dump at the said site,” he added. Nkala said he doubted that the municipality would be true to
their word and send people to clear the dump but they will have to “wait and
see”.