If you have access to the Internet, a cellphone, bank cards
or a car, the chances are you’ve been scammed. And the more advanced the
technology, it seems, the more imaginative the con. According to the South African Banking Risk Information
Centre (Sabric), South Africa has the third highest number of cyber-crime
victims in the world, which results in a loss of about R2.2 billion each year. This means that, every time you log onto your smartphone,
computer or open an e-mail, you are at risk of being exposed to cyber-crime. In its 2017 report, cyber security firm Norton said,
globally, 978 million consumers were affected by cyber-crime with losses
totalling $172 billion. Pietermaritzburg central police station spokesperson Captain
Khosi Khonjelwayo said scammers have become harder to spot and far more slick. “In the past you could spot them a mile away. Now it is a
quality approach; they are much more professional. The English is perfect, and
they use quality documents,” said Khonjelwayo. She said that, while only a few people will respond, and
among those who respond very few of them will pay the money, someone will
always take the bait, unfortunately, which is why scamming continues to be a
widespread scourge. The Witness previously reported that Mbalenhle Nsuntsha,
from Edendale, lost R11 300 after the SIM card in her cellphone was hacked. Nsuntsha said that, soon after her cellphone SIM card had
stopped working, she was persuaded to do a SIM swap. She then watched in horror as message after message appeared
on her phone, indicating that numerous transactions were paid out of her
account. She said the bogus agent had sounded very professional and
managed to convince her that she really worked for the cellular network. Kyle Condon, managing director of D&K Management
Consultants, said he believed that people fell victim to this crime because the
websites, SMSs or e-mails appeared incredibly legitimate. “In addition, a large majority of victims are the elderly.
These age-groups are vulnerable as they are often not aware of the latest
criminal trends and are not as tech-savvy as the generations born with an iPad
in hand.” In May, Howick SAPS warned members of the public to be on
high alert after a number of scams were reported in Howick and surrounding
areas. KwaZulu Natal police spokesman Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said
there had been a number of cases reported where criminals would approach
victims while they were at the ATM withdrawing money, interrupting them with
the purpose of stealing their card. “While the victims are confused, the suspect will then swap
the bank card and quickly visit another ATM to withdraw the victim’s cash.” In another scam, Mbhele said the victims would purchase
items from the Internet, or through the advertisements on newspapers. “When they call the seller to make a follow-up regarding the
advertisement, they will be given banking details to deposit the money. After
the money had been deposited, the victim will be asked again to deposit the
money for transportation of the items. As soon as the money is deposited, the
suspect’s cellphone will be switched off or disconnected.” She urged members of the public to be cautious when withdrawing
money at ATMs and also when they are doing internet transactions. “The community is also warned to be cautious about
advertisements placed in newspapers as some are not genuine but [are] scams.
They must also avoid making transactions to the account numbers of dealers that
they are not sure of,” she said. Meanwhile, Mandisa Mkhize from Grange is one of many
cellphone users who has been scammed through fraudulent contract upgrades. Mkhize said her 24-month cellular contract with one of the
major service providers expired in June 2017 and she chose not to “upgrade” it
at the time. When she visited the service provider’s branch in
Pietermaritzburg in July 2017, she was told the system reflected that, in June
of that year, she’d upgraded the contract from the R389/month package she’d
signed up for to a R762/month contract which came with an iPhone 7. When Mkhize checked her bank statement, she discovered that
the cellular network had debited an amount of R1 900 in July, and R762 every
month since. She said she was told that the contract had been upgraded at
the cellular networks branch in Davenport, in Durban. “I was told to submit an affidavit stating what had
happened. They said a query would be logged and someone would get back to me.” Despite this, she said, she is still battling to get the
service provider to deal with the issue, saying: “No one wants to resolve this.
Every time I call them I get a different story and yet my bank account has been
debited every month for the past thirteen months,” she said, stating that her
bank refused to cancel the debit order until the cellular network issued
instructions for this to be done. Gcinani Ndaba-Mhlungu said he had also been scammed and was
paying R1 200 monthly to another cellular network for an upgrade he did not do. Khonjelwayo advised that the only defence against scams is
awareness. “If it sounds too good to be true, it is. Never respond to
an e-mail, SMS or phone call requiring you to submit personal information, even
if it’s in the form of a threat to your account being suspended due to some
third-party interference.” KwaZulu-Natal based private investigator Rick Crouch of Rick
Crouch and Associates said they have received a flood of calls from concerned
people regarding a recent e-mail scam. “The e-mails are pretty much the same, with some of the
content slightly different depending on the recipient, but they all have a few
similar features,” said Crouch. He said that, in the e-mail, the subject line includes a
password that you probably have used at some point or your identity number. The
sender will tell the unsuspecting person that they have used that password to
hack your computer, install malware, and record video of you through your
webcam and they say they will reveal your adult-website habits and send videos
of you to your contacts unless you send them bitcoin, usually US$1 200 or
US$3 800 worth. “The message seems plausible because it has your username
and (likely old) password in the subject line. It seems that plenty of people
have fallen for it.” Crouch said a Dutch security researcher examined a few dozen
of the Bitcoin addresses referenced in the e-mails and found that they had
received in excess of $50 000 as of July 19. “You will notice that the password referred to is an old
password that you may have used years ago.” “These passwords and user names most likely came from a data
breach years ago and have been circulating on the Internet for some time. [The
scammers] hope you’re scared enough to believe their story and send them
bitcoin.” He advised that if you are using the password being
referenced in the e-mail to change it immediately. To check whether your password is in one of the leaked
databases, go to https://haveibeenpwned.com/ Local psychologist Clive Willows said that some of the
reasons why some people easily fall for scams is because they are put under
pressure. “They are told that something is urgent and if they don’t
respond immediately there will be negative consequences,” said Willow. “People respond out of being anxious, and that means that
they don’t check the legalities or the validity of what is being presented.” Willows added that the fear of losing an opportunity in the
tough economic times also made it easy for people to comply when they are told
that they will benefit with little effort on their part.  Service providers double down on wasp protection While reports indicate that many cell phone users are
scammed by network providers into subscribing to receive unsolicited services,
MTN and Cell C told Weekend Witness they had implemented a “Double Opt-In” to
ensure customers are protected. “This is a two-step process that requires customers who
request WASP services to confirm their request prior to delivery of content and
billing,” said Cell C executive head of communication Karin Fourie. Fourie said this process ensures that customers are informed
of all the service details before they purchase a wireless application service
providers service. Additionally, customers are welcome to log a query with the
Wireless Application Service Providers’ Association (WASPA) who will request
the verification details of the subscription from the content provider in
question. Jacqui O’Sullivan, executive for corporate affairs at MTN
SA, said: “We have conducted in-depth checks and ensure that all its technology
partners and other stakeholders adhere and comply with the Consumer Protection
Act. Internal investigations have revealed that there are unscrupulous external
sources that are making fraudulent subscriptions on cellular networks.” O’Sullivan said MTN has also implemented the “Double opt in”
across all services to increase subscription security and ensure that customers
take greater control of their subscriptions.  Tips to being secure online According to Sabric, there are a few precautions you can
take to avoid becoming the victim of a scam.   