Tired of waiting for the uMngeni Municipality to fix potholes in the neighbourhood, World’s View residents rolled up their sleeves to do it themselves. Resident Howard Richardson told The Witness that for two months, they had been asking the municipality to repair about 15 potholes on World’s View Road, and nothing happened. On Saturday, the residents got together, donated bags of premix, hired a compactor and fixed the problem. “We’ve got a WhatsApp group and one of the members suggested that we just fix these ourselves,” he said pointing to a large pothole patch. “We cleaned them up, hired a wacker and we did it in an hour. It was absolutely amazing.” In the coming months, Richardson said they intend to fill all the potholes on the stretch of the road leading up to the World’s View Park. “You need a 4x4 to get through there. I don’t think we are going to get any response from the municipality. We spoke to our ward councillor who told us that they [municipality] won’t do anything because they don’t have the money.” Richardson, a civil engineer, said the road was deteriorating and needed resurfacing. He said the residents estimated there were about 20 holes “of various sizes and depths” along World’s View Road. “I don’t think they’re going to fix this road in my lifetime. Most of the time it can handle the traffic it gets but every now and then when the forestry people start harvesting the trees you get huge crate trucks coming down here and that’s what damages the road.” He said the ongoing damage to roads is only one part of the problem. Subsequent damage to motor vehicles is a huge expense and inconvenience. “If you don’t know where all the potholes are, you can seriously damage your car. “Safety is our biggest concern, and potholes can cause serious accidents. Therefore we — as residents — have to act and help remove this safety hazard.” Richardson said residents complained of tyre, shock absorber and wheel alignment damage as a result of driving on the road. “It’s criminal to allow a community asset to deteriorate to no value. We have tourists coming to visit the heritage site here and the state of this road is unacceptable,” said Richardson. On the Hilton Chat Facebook group, residents from Azalea Drive and Flamingo Road said they had also been fixing potholes on an ongoing basis. Cherise Platt said: “We also have a wonderful community member who has taken on the task of maintaining verges and other overgrowth, most of us chipping in a small sum monthly. We have taken ownership of our neighborhood and beautified it where we can. Well done World’s View on taking back yours.”