Maritzburg United player Luyanda Ntshangase remains in the intensive care unit (ICU) in hospital after he was struck by lightning last Thursday. The 21-year-old striker had been on the field with the rest of his team-mates when he was injured along with three players from an SAB league local football club, Arsenal FC. Ntshangase suffered burns to his chest, while the other three players, Samkelo Nzimande, Njabulo Madlala and Ngcebo Ngcobo, suffered mild injuries. Maritzburg United managing director and club chairperson Farook Kadodia told The Witness on Sunday that there is no official word on Ntshangase’s condition and he remains on a ventilator at MediClinic hospital. “We visited him yesterday [Saturday] and the doctor said they would continue to keep him connected to the respiratory machine for another day or two. “The doctor said he will only be able to assess any damage once he’s regained consciousness,” Kadodia said. - Health24: Lightning safety tips He added that the incident had left the other team members terribly shaken. “We just have to hope that he pulls through and that the doctors give the best treatment available to try to get him to come back to consciousness,” Kadodia said. Meanwhile, social media networks have been flooded with messages wishing Ntshangase a speedy recovery. Tanaka Chikwezvero wrote on Facebook: “Bro I pray you are well.” Siphesihle Khanyile said: “I need you to hold on for me bro, you can’t do this to me.” Michael Dibben wrote on his Facebook page: “All our thoughts and prayers go out to Luyanda Ntshangase, a former 1st XI player and current Maritzburg United player, who was struck by lightning at training. Fight hard, young man, we all know you’ve got it in you to make it through this.” Xolani Brookyln wrote on Twitter: “Get well soon Luyanda Ntshangase we are with you in our prayers.” Ntshangase is a regular player for the club’s Multichoice Diski Challenge team but he was promoted to the first team last season along with Bandile Shandu and Siphesihle Ndlovu. He has made a several appearances for coach Fadlu Davids’ side in the Absa Premiership this season. Efforts to contact the Ntshangase family on Sunday were unsuccessful.