When Pietermaritzburg-born cricket star Sarel Erwee reflects
on the recently finished domestic season, he will realise how strongly his
fortunes have changed, as he managed to insert himself as a top player at the
Dolphins. Erwee, as one of the key players for the Dolphins during the
season, helped the Durbanites to their first title after three years of drought
and he finished the season with three gold medals and one silver. The St Charles old boy was also the first player to get a
century in the RAM SLAM T20 Challenge. The opening batsman is now the winner of Africa T20 Cup,
Hong Kong Sixes where he represented South Africa, Momentum One-Day Cup, and
also finished as runner-up in the T20 Challenge with the Dolphins. But his success came after a lot of heartache he endured a
season before, when his dream to play for the Dolphins was finally realised but
injuries forced him to wait a bit longer for real action. As painful as it was, Erwee didn’t give up, but he came back
home and joined KwaZulu-Natal Inland with a hope to get back to Kingsmead. It’s part of history now that it worked out well as he began
the season by winning the T20 Cup with Inland in September. “It’s actually the lots of hard work that I put together
over the years that has now accumulated to all the success of this season,”
said Erwee. “I think it all started with the Africa T20 Cup win when I
was with Inland again and just being with coach Shane Burger and the team I
grew up playing for helped me a lot to get back to my best, so I think that was
the start of it really. “To win the Momentum One-Day Cup was very special, firstly
it’s a trophy that hasn’t been to Kingsmead after so many years. It’s actually
an unbelievable feeling because of that and to contribute the way I did and
after not being submitted in the original squad at the beginning of the
tournament was quite pleasing.” Though it’s hard for him to choose his best moment for this
season, Erwee said he was proud to be part of the team that helped South Africa
to their fifth Hong Kong Sixes title. “It was probably one of the better weekends of cricket in my
life; it’s right up there with obviously the One-Day Cup, the T20 final we
played this season and the Africa Cup. Hong Kong was just the cherry on the
cake,” he said. “For me, next season is just to be consistent, especially in
the four-day format. I started well in the competition this year, but I ended
quite poorly. I don’t know if maybe it was the end-of-season syndrome that
happened.”