Workers are working frantically to open Liberty Midlands Mall’s R450 million expansion in two weeks. Shoppers will hardly have missed the construction work on the northern end of Pietermaritzburg’s busiest mall over the past 18 months. Yesterday, it was evident from a walk around the construction site, that a great deal of finishing still needs to be done, and many shops still have to be fitted out. But project manager Peter Lowe said the mall expansion remains on schedule to begin trading on March 15. It will introduce retail and leisure space of almost 22 000 square metres to the existing mall, increasing the size overall to 78 000 square metres. The parking space grows by almost 500 bays and extends under the retail floor level. The mall will accommodate over 3 000 vehicles overall. The expansion will also welcome several “firsts to the PMB market” retailers when it opens. “The Phase 3 expansion brings the tenant count to over 200 stores (from 160), and has provided space for brands we could not previously accommodate,” said Liberty Two Degrees’ asset management executive, Brian Unsted. Liberty Midlands Mall is co-owned by Liberty Group Limited and Liberty Two Degrees. New tenants include Volpes, Coricraft, Pick n Pay Clothing, Tekkie Town, The Hub, Just Plastics, Rochester, @home livingspace, amongst others, anchored by a new generation Checkers. The existing Woolworths is being substantially expanded. RocoMamas and Mozambik will be two of the five restaurants in Phase 3’s indoor-outdoor, alfresco style dining offering. The dining and other leisure components, including a “beautiful water feature”, were all aimed at bringing a great “lifestyle destination” theme to the mall, said architect Gerald Shultz from Impendulo Design Architects. Since opening in 2003, Liberty Midlands Mall has established itself as the leading retail destination in the Midlands. It turns over R156 million on average per month, generated from foot traffic of around 7,9 million people a year. NEW SHOPS AT LIBERTY MALL • Checkers • Volpes • Coricraft • Pick n Pay Clothing • Tekkie Town • The Hub • Just Plastics • Rochester • @home livingspace • RocoMamas • Mozambik