Two morgue workers were caught stashing a R2 200 shower cubicle into the back of a state van at the weekend and their getaway was foiled after a car chase. The shower cubicle was stolen from a large tile store on Victoria Road, supposedly with the help of a shop assistant, on Sunday afternoon. The efforts of the two forensic pathology workers, who were wearing their work uniforms, were foiled after they were caught in the act by one of the store managers. A witness to the theft said one of the two was a woman who had bought tiles on Sunday morning. “She came into the store around 9 am with her husband and they purchased tiles from the store. We suspect that they schemed with the employee while he was assisting them to load the goods into their vehicle,” said the source. The source said the couple left but the wife returned at midday accompanied by a male colleague. “The woman came back in the state vehicle around 12 pm. I saw her calling the staff member into the vehicle. A few minutes later, the van went around the building.” The source said the staff member and the two morgue workers drove around to the back of the store building to the stock area. “I was looking through the window and I noticed that they were going around to the back of the store. I followed them and waited to see what happens. The man opened the vehicle and my colleague passed them the shower unit and they loaded it inside the van.” The source said when she approached the two to ask what they were doing, they started apologising. “The woman said that she is weak and that she had made a mistake. The man, who was the one driving the van, signaled the woman to get inside and they drove off.” The source said a chase ensued and they managed to block off the pair on Greyling Street. “We tried blocking them off while we alerted the police but they drove around us. We followed them into the Fort Napier mortuary and they continued to say that they did nothing wrong. They said they were just collecting the shower unit and were not stealing it.” Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a theft case was opened. No arrests have yet been made. The KZN Health Department could not be reached for comment.