A Pietermaritzburg tombstone company has come up with a macabre, hard-hitting campaign to raise awareness of drinking and driving, especially over the Easter period. Teggs Granite owner Neville Teggs is offering a granite tombstone, with an inscription, worth R10 000 to be collected from Teggs Granite. The catch? The tombstone is on offer only for people who come into Teggs Granite and fill out an application form, declaring their intention to commit a drink-and-drive offence over Easter. Teggs said the unusual campaign was started in a bid to slow the number of drink-drive offences ahead of Easter “that last year claimed 235 lives, a 51% increase from 2016”. “Every year, KZN records the highest number of deaths, and last year, it went up by 111%, from 28 to 59 deaths,” he said. “While more visible policing obviously helps, drivers need to take responsibility for their own actions, including not getting behind the wheel when they have been drinking.” Teggs said the idea came from an American undertaker who started a similar campaign over the New Year period. He said he had a similar campaign a few years ago, but hoped this year it would raise more awareness around drinking and driving. “I do not condone drinking and driving by running this campaign. It is to bring the reality home of the consequences of drinking and driving. People have to come into Teggs Granite physically and fill out a form and when they come in we ask how their mom or dad, or other family feel about this. The shock value is priceless. It forces people to confront the consequences of their actions before doing anything they’ll regret when it’s too late,” he said. Applicants must be the driver of the vehicle and fill in a form with their life history, and also nominate the family member who will deliver the epitaph to Tegg’s Granite on their death and arrange collection of the tombstone. He said applications will be open from midnight tonight and close at midnight on Monday. “We hope our initiative will force people to question their choices about life and death,” he said.