Two-time Comrades
Marathon winner and reigning champion Bongmusa Mthembu has been working hard to
defend his crown this June, clocking up plenty of kilometres during training
and races. Mthembu, born in
Bulwer, was a comfortable winner of the Comrades last year in the colours of
Arthur Ford running club, and his previous triumph in the “Ultimate Human Race”
was in 2014. But the
Pietermaritzburg resident had to cut short his training stint in Lesotho this
week to pay his last respects to friend and fellow ultra-distance runner Sphiwe
Ndlela. The South African
running fraternity is still in mourning the sudden death of the 28-year-old
gold medallist Ndlela, who reportedly fell ill during a training camp in the
Drakensberg. Ndlela, born in Ixopo
in southern KwaZulu-Natal, reportedly complained of abdominal pain, sweating
profusely and vomiting during the camp. The Nedbank athlete
later died despite efforts by paramedics to save him. Ndlela finished in
the top 10 in the Comrades and the Two Oceans in 2016 and 2017. Mthembu said he had
had a “brotherly relationship” with Ndlela. He arrived back in
Pietermaritzburg on Thursday from Lesotho to attend the memorial services for
Ndlela in the city last night and Durban on Friday. He said: “I’ve just
arrived from Lesotho. We’ve been hit hard. Sphiwe was like a brother to me. We
spent 2013 and 2014 training together in camp and I know that he learned a lot
from me there. “He was focused and dedicated.
We are still in shock because he was a strong and a healthy person. This
happened at a very bad time for us and especially his family because his career
was starting to blossom. “He had been
supporting his family because, like myself, he came from a disadvantaged
background. “I pray for the
family and friends left behind.” Mthembu, who is one
of a handful of athletes to have won the iconic race more than once since Bruce
Fordyce in 1990, said he had been doing training at altitude in Lesotho when he
learnt of Ndlela’s death, as he continued to prepare for the Comrades Down Run
on Sunday, June 10. “The preparations are
going very well. I’m happy with everything and I have no injuries or anything
that could prevent me from running,” he said. “I’ll be competing in
the Two Oceans soon and I hope to do well there, as well.” The 93rd edition will
commence at the Pietermaritzburg City Hall at 5.30 am, finishing 12 hours later at the
iconic Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban, covering a distance of approximately 90 km. Ndlela will be laid
to rest on Sunday in his hometown.