 Sharks coach Robert du Preez doesn’t believe there are any
sinister forces in his side, who have been a disappointment in this Super Rugby
campaign, and is confident they will come right. Before the start of the season, a lot was said about how the
Sharks could be a dangerous side in the competition because of the quality team
they assembled during the off-season. But after five rounds of matches played by the Sharks, the
Durbanites have not really lived up to those expectations, with only one
victory to their name among three defeats and a draw. The only victory came against the Super Rugby punching bag,
the Sunwolves. The Durban-based franchise are still to record a win on
their current tour, having lost two matches in a row to the Brumbies and the
Rebels. With the way things have gone, people wouldn’t be blamed if
they were starting to think there might be problems in the Sharks dressing
room. “There are no team issues or anything sinister, not at all.
We have lost two games and this happens in rugby. It’s not the first time a
team has toured overseas and have lost two games on the trot,” said Du Preez. “This is obviously disappointing for us and we are working
incredibly hard, the team has worked hard, the coaches have worked. “I can’t fault the effort against the Rebels, but it’s the
accuracy and the execution we have to work on. It has not been there.” Du Preez said everyone in the team needed to take
responsibility for the team’s lacklustre performances and work as a unit to
change their fortunes. “The boys are very disappointed because they know that we
are letting the fans down and they are letting themselves down,” he said. “So there’s disappointment and some frustration around that,
but we have to work hard. We are all in this together and we will fix this
thing together. “We are not looking at the players as the management or the
coaching team, pointing fingers. We are going to fix this thing together and I
know we will,” he said. “We have turned every stone, we have looked at everything
critically, there is a great spirit in the camp. We have had good practices.” Du Preez also believes the Durban outfit have been short of
luck of late. “This is a damn good team, a very talented team, but we know
sometimes you just need one or two or three lucky breaks and that puts the team
in a good space. I think that’s what we are looking for,” said the coach. On Saturday, the Sharks will take on the Blues at Eden Park
in Auckland, New Zealand, at 8.35 am (SA time). The Blues are also looking to get their campaign on the road
as they lost three matches and won only one.  