As processed meat products linked to the national listeriosis outbreak have been recalled, informal street traders say this will be detrimental to their businesses. On Sunday, Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi said the Polokwane operations of Tiger Brands’ meat producer Enterprise Foods was identified as the source of the outbreak. Standing behind her makeshift table and paraffin stove, with amagwinya (vetkoek), polony and smoked Russians on the go, was Christina Mlambo (56). Mlambo said she wakes up at 4 am every day and travels from France township to Pietermaritzburg’s Central Business District (CBD) to sell amagwinya and polony in order to put food on the table for her family. “I heard them talking on the radio about the disease. I don’t understand what it is or how one gets it,” she said, packing amagwinya and polony into a transparent plastic bag for one of her consumers. On a good winter’s day, Mlambo said she makes about R700. “In winter, people love the smell of amagwinya with polony for breakfast but in summer the business is slow and I only take home between R200 and R300.” With the money, Mlambo told The Witness she has managed to send her first born to university. “Selling amagwinya and polony is my only source of income. Today has been a very quiet day. All the customers were telling me they will never eat polony again.” Also read: Killer food carnage Mlambo said she had already stocked up for the month. “I have to throw all the polony away,” she added. Joyce Hlongwane is also one of the many street traders who line up outside the Freedom Square taxi rank on Langalibalele Street every morning selling amagwinya with polony and other foods. She said her youngest daughter had already alerted her not to buy Enterprise or Rainbow Chicken cold meats. “It’s tough but we have to accept that we can’t sell these products anymore. Imagine if someone got sick after buying food from you.” She said it would be hard to regain the trust of customers if that happened. Kebene Tamro, who owns Teddy’s supermarket on Timber Street, said he had stocked his three monthly batches of polony and Viennas from Bluff Meat Supply on Friday. “Everyone is scared for their health. I’ll have to dispose of it,” Tamro said. Thomas Williams, a shop assistant at Sony’s supermarket in Fraser Lane, said when he heard the announcement he did not think it was serious. “Someone sent me a video but I didn’t get a chance to watch it. I didn’t think it was anything serious,” Williams said they buy their cold meats from a local butchery. Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the municipality does not have a mandate to order informal traders to stop selling the contaminated products. “This is a national crisis, meaning that the national Health Department has the mandate to stop informal traders from selling these products, not us,” Mafumbatha added.