A 30-year-old woman was raped in her Scottsville flat just a stone’s throw away from the Alexandra Road Police Station, amid concerns that the attack may have been the work of a serial rapist. Sources familiar with the investigation said on Sunday the woman was asleep when a stranger entered her second-storey flat. The incident happened in the early hours of Tuesday morning. “He got into her flat, pulled her off the bed and raped her. Then he stole some stuff and left.” The source said on Sunday that the woman was still “battered and traumatised”. It is understood that the manner of the attack matches another case in the Scottsville area, apart from an attack and attempted rape of an 87-year-old woman by her gardener. Police confirmed a case of house robbery and rape was under investigation, and the case was transferred to the Pietermartizburg Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences unit. The assailant made off with the victim’s cell phone, spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbhele said. She said no arrests have been made. The Witness visited the housing complex where the incident happened, and neighbours, who did not know the victim, said they were unaware of any assaults. Neighbours described the housing complex as safe, but not without incidents. “A few years ago, some people fiddled with the motor in the front gate, opened the gate and stole my car. And this complex is right under the nose of the police station.” Meanwhile, Imraan Osman, the director of WPS Security, which services the Scottsville area, said crimes against students were common in the area. “Students are constantly walking on these roads because they go from their dorms to university. We have handled some cases where we have retrieved cell phones that were stolen from them. “In the last two weeks we’ve had our vehicles patrolling the area, especially at night. “This week we sat down with DUT [the Durban University of Technology] and spoke about possibly offering some security.” The area’s councillor, Vic Winterbach, said he had not heard of the incident, but said “an attack of this nature needs to be condemned in the highest degree. “Not only does it cause incalculable harm to the victim, but is also demeaning and an invasion of privacy.” He added: “While crime is regrettably still rampant in some areas, the message of crime awareness and prevention is increasingly being spread via the many security and neighbourhood watch chat groups, which has already resulted in a significant increase in the reporting of crimes and arrests.”