After a patchy start
to the Absa Premiership season, Maritzburg United’s recent success continues to
draw strong crowds to Harry Gwala Stadium and coach Fadlu Davids is not letting
his guard down in terms of on-field business. The “Team of Choice”,
whose highest finish in the Premiership has been seventh under Davids’s
guidance, are destined to record their best ever campaign. They are lying a
pretty third on the log table with 38 points from 24 matches, following their
2-1 victory over Polokwane City last Friday. Twelve of those
matches have been played at their home ground, Harry Gwala Stadium, and their
gritty performances seem to have turned the venue into a fortress. They have lost three
matches, won six and a further three have been drawn. Last Friday was no
different in terms of the good attendance figures this season. New Bafana Bafana
call-up Siphesihle Ndlovu and defender Pogiso Sanoka were on the scoresheet for
the hosts, while Malawian debutant Muhammad Sulumba netted for Polokwane. As expected, the
36-year-old Davids was impressed with his team’s efforts, but insisted their
goal had not yet been achieved in the league. He said: “Fantastic
start to the game, getting the early goal. But the injury to Brian Onyango was
a setback for us. “It changed the
complexion of the game. We were not able to keep our thinking and that is where
we definitely have to improve. “We were sitting back
and that’s not really how we want to play, but we have to give credit to the
players for putting their bodies on the line and not giving up. I think we have
to go over the line. “This league is so
harsh. We’ve seen how every team has gone four or five games without a win. “So we can’t relax. “We have to get over
that 43-point mark to secure our top-eight place and then look further.” Davids was
particularly happy to see young defender Rushine de Reuck put on a solid
display after again being thrown into the deep end when Onyango sustained his injury
early in the game. He said the best was
yet to come from the 22-year-old centreback. “He made a mistake
earlier but how he bounced back really shows maturity. He was absolutely
fantastic. I’m so proud of him. He has so much more potential. We see it in
training and once he fully believes in himself, he’ll be a hell of a player.” But while he was
impressed with De Reuck, he was frustrated with his defensive partner Sanoka
for picking up a fourth yellow card for time-wasting towards the end of the
game. This means Sanoka
will miss their next match through an automatic one-match ban. Davids said: “It was
all Sanoka’s fault. I’m not irritated with the referee. You can’t waste time in
the last seconds of the game. You know you’re on three yellow cards and you
still go and do something like that!” United have the week
off, along with other clubs due to the international programme, and will next
play Bloem Celtic in the Nedbank Cup quarter-finals on March 31 on home turf
without Sanoka. Their next league
match will follow on April 3 against defending champions Bidvest Wits at
Bidvest Stadium in Johannebsurg.