One of Pietermaritzburg’s oldest and most treasured pipe
organs, located at the St George’s Garrison Anglican Church, was taken to
pieces last week for its first service since 1926. The organ was built in 1904 by local organ builder William
Kemp. He  also installed the first organ
in the Pietermaritzburg City Hall in 1893, but had to replace it in 1901 after
the first one was destroyed in the great fire of 1898. When The Witness visited the church last week, most of the
678 pipes had been taken out to be cleaned and fixed, amid “10 000 bits
scattered around the church”, as Jack Frost, the St George’s organist, put it. He said the organ would be ready for the Sunday after the
Easter weekend and in the meantime, the church would be using a piano. Frost
estimated the cost of servicing the ancient musical instrument to be about
R45 000. Archie Devere, organ builder from the Jan Zielman
Orrelbouers firm in Pretoria, who is tasked with servicing the organ with his
colleague Ananias Teane, said they had started dissembling the organ on
Thursday last week and expected to have it back together again in no time. “We still need to tune it and ensure that every note is
precisely as it should be and that might take some time to complete,” said
Devere. Frost said what made the St George’s organ so special was
that fact that the organ has not been changed or rebuilt. “To this day, the organ is still playing exceptionally well.
Some notes had stopped working but everything will be working well after the
servicing of the organ,” said Frost. Detailing the history of the St George’s organ and the
church built in 1898, Frost said the space to the right of the chancel, which
is now occupied by the organ, was once reserved for the military band. Frost said the organ was described as “the first order for a
grand organ to be built completely in the colony” and it was dedicated by the
bishop (together with new memorial windows) on December 15, 1903. “The then chaplain, Newman, wrote to Kemp that ‘we are all
much pleased with the organ you have built for us’,” while Bishop Baines
recorded that “the organ built by Mr William Kemp for St George’s Garrison
Church is, in my opinion, a beautiful instrument, thoroughly good throughout’.
It was heard for the first time in combination with the band of the West
Yorkshire Regiment at the Parade service on Easter Day of 1904,” said Frost. According to Frost, who has been the organist at the church
for four years, the first organist to serve any length of time was a Mr Walden,
who occupied the organ bench from 1905 to 1913. In September 1927 Willie Poole was appointed to the office
of organist and choirmaster. When Willie Poole celebrated his seventieth anniversary as
organist, Dr Harry Bramma, director of the Royal School of Church Music, noted
that “there have been some very long-serving organists during the course of
history. Thomas Tomkins was organist at Worcester Cathedral for 60 years and
Sir George Thalben-Ball organist of the Temple Church for 62. These fade into
insignificance when set against your 70.” A Natal Witness editorial commented that “according to the
Royal School of Church Music this [anniversary] makes [Poole] the longest
serving organist of whom they have record. “It is an astonishing feat of quiet loyalty and devotion
which is unlikely to be equalled, let alone surpassed. “As the country’s oldest newspaper The Natal Witness
congratulates the world’s most enduring organist who has brought to
Pietermaritzburg a most unusual record.” “Willie Poole’s long service as organist finally came to an
end when he played his last service on December 19, 1999. He died in February,
2000. His tenure of 72 years and three months will surely never be equalled,
let alone surpassed — anywhere,” said Frost.