A Michaelhouse staff member and his family were robbed at gunpoint
on Monday morning when five men entered the school estate and broke into the
man’s home. Swift action by the school’s
security company and police resulted in five men being arrested within hours —
two of them at the scene of the incident following a shootout on the school
property. The staff member (whose name
was withheld for professional reasons) and his wife live in a house on the
school grounds. The Witness was told
that other family members were visiting the couple and were present at the time
of the robbery. None of the family members were
injured during the robbery and were lucky to escape with just a few bruises. It was around 2 am on Monday
when the peace of the estate was broken by a shrill alarm, sounding the call
for help. The school’s security company,
Ballid Security, rushed to the scene in response to the alarm and interrupted
the robbery in progress. Mountain Rise police
spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said on Monday the five men had entered the
house through the back door. Ebrahim said one of the five
men had a gun and the family members were bound with handcuffs or electrical
cord as the robbers ransacked the house. Ebrahim said when the robbers
realised that Ballid Security had arrived at the house, they began firing shots
at the guards. The guards retaliated and shot back, hitting two of the robbers,
one in the leg and the other in the buttocks. The two injured men were
arrested and when police arrived on scene, the hunt for the other three robbers
began. Police, together with Ballid
Security were able to track down the remaining three suspects with the last
robber being arrested at 4 am on Monday morning along the R103. The robbers’ getaway vehicle
was also seized and it was found that the men had already loaded and packed the
car with stolen items, ready to transport them to their next destination. “More stolen items are still
missing,” said Ebrahim. “The investigation is ongoing and at a delicate stage. “Thus far, it has been
established that one of the suspects was in possession of a firearm,” Ebrahim
said. Ballid Security owner Riaan
Claasen commended the brave guards who responded to the robbery and said they
did a “brilliant job”. “We live for this ... keeping
people safe,” said Claassen, adding it was suspected that the five men have
been involved in various other robberies but further investigations will
confirm this. Michaelhouse marketing manager
Murray Witherspoon they are still trying to understand how the culprits made
their way onto the grounds, but “Ballid Security and the police reacted very
quickly; they were unbelievable. “The incident has really
brought home the reality of the world beyond our gates. We’re constantly
re-evaluating our security measures and processes, and the incident has
confirmed the importance of this. “We had an emergency meeting
with the staff at 7.15 am this morning and after that we met with the boys to
explain what had happened. “All the parents were contacted
at 4.30 am to let them know about the incident and that all was okay. Everyone
is in the loop and it helps to step up vigilance,” he said. Ebrahim said the five arrested
men are expected to appear in court soon. 