City billing has once again
been thrown into disarray and residents who are not receiving their monthly
accounts are fearful that the municipality will use this as a pretext to
disconnect their electricity, as the long Easter weekend looms. Msunduzi has been accused
of “targeting residents in a desperate attempt for a cash injection” as
hundreds of electricity meters were disconnected for non-payment recently. The ongoing disconnections
are part of the municipality’s revenue enhancement strategy to reduce the R2,1
billion debtors book. Last month, Msunduzi
collected more than R290 million from properties that were disconnected. However, many residents
have accused the City of jumping the gun by rushing to disconnect their
properties when it has failed to send them monthly accounts. Among the angry residents
who are caught up in the current billing crisis is Scottsville’s Nompumelelo
Mhlanga, who said she has not received her monthly account since July. She has been paying R2 500
every month, an average that her statements used to reflect. “Ever since they started
talking about disconnections I’ve been going to the AS Chetty building at least
twice a month to request the printouts for my statements because I honestly
don’t know how much I owe and I don’t want to be cut off,” she said. The Witness has
reported extensively on residents’ frustration over Msunduzi’s failure to send
their bills. Businessman Prem Ramlall
said the inefficiencies in the City’s billing department are inconveniencing
ratepayers who want and can afford to pay what they owe. “When you go to their
offices no one is able to give you a straight answer about when you are going
to get your statements, and calling is a waste of time, because no one picks up
the phone,” he said. Northdale resident Chris
Naidu said he has been passed from pillar to post every time he goes and
request his statements. He also fears he could be disconnected over debt he is
not even aware of. Naidu said he also struggled getting through the
municipality’s call centre as the phone rang unanswered. Mother-of-two Liv Jenkins
said she has sent numerous e-mails to the City’s billing department requesting
her statement but no one has responded. She said Msunduzi used to
e-mail her statements without her even requesting them, but that stopped late
last year and no reason was given. “The municipality is
inviting a revolt because we are not going to allow them to cut our power off
when they are the ones who are not sending out statements. “As it is I don’t know if I
should be paying more or less than what I’m paying and I don’t even get any
acknowledgements of the payments I make but at least I have my bank statements
as proof,” she said. Msunduzi spokesperson
Thobeka Mafumbatha had not responded to Witness questions at the time
of publication last night. Last week she said
consumers who have not received a statement of their accounts by the 15th of
each month must e-mail billing@msunduzi.gov.za or phone 033 392 2741 or visit
the municipality’s offices to get a copy of their statements. However, many residents
said they have sent e-mails, which are ignored, and that their calls go
unanswered. 