 Former military veterans who invaded a housing
complex in Pietermaritzburg two weeks ago are now at each other’s throats over
the spoils of their operation. The war veterans took over more than 100
residential units at the city’s flagship housing project, Aloe Ridge in
Westgate-Grange after overpowering employees working at the complex. However, some of the war veterans who were
initially part of the group allocated flats now claim that they have since been
kicked out by those claiming to be the masterminds of the invasion. “I was here from day one when the operation was
launched, but last week these people calling themselves commanders forced me
and the other comrades to hand back the keys. “They told us we will not be allowed to occupy the
houses as there [are] more deserving comrades. “When we tried to resist we were forcibly removed
from the premises and threatened with violence should we return,” said an
expelled occupant claiming a former member of the Azapo’s Azanian National
Liberation Army (Azanla). The largest of its kind across the entire
KwaZulu-Natal province, the Aloe Ridge project with 950 units is designed to
help low-income groups access rental accommodation within the city. According to the Azanla ex-combatant, who alongside
two other expelled invaders met The Witness outside the
housing complex on Monday afternoon, individuals who are not members of SA’s
former liberation movements were recently spotted walking into the complex. “We were told that many of the people that are now
occupying the units we were ejected from are young people who can’t be members
of Azanla, Africanist Congress’ Azanian People’s Liberation Army (Apla) and
former Mkhonto weSizwe ex-combatants. “We suspect that the guys calling themselves allied
forces ... are now selling the units and pocketing the money,” said the former
Azanla member, who did not want to be identified for security reasons. More than 650 of the 950 apartments have already
been leased to low- income tenants while the 120 that are currently occupied by
the war veterans are part of the 300 units that were in the process of being
allocated to beneficiaries — mainly people earning below R7 500 a month. The complex is owned by non-profit company (NPC)
Capital City Housing, which has already secured a court interdict against the
invaders. The Witness on
Monday found the gate to the complex locked, with some invaders spotted
gathered in groups inside the complex. While Babo Mndaweni, an Azanla ex-combatant who is
the co-ordinator of the invasion, conceded that there had been fights over
units, he said he was not aware of the selling of the apartments. “What I can confirm is that there had been people
who did not want to follow rules and wanted the operation to go according to
their wishes. “However, as the leadership we can’t allow any
conduct that will make us come across as ill-disciplined people. “I can confirm that all the internal challenges we
have been facing since arrived here have been addressed and what we are now
focusing on is the negotiations currently under way between us and Capital City
Housing,” Mndaweni said. On the locked gate, Mndaweni said the war veterans
resolved to lock it to maintain order. “We noticed that people who we didn’t know were
also coming in and we worried that we will be held responsible if something
wrong happened inside the complex,” he said. The R353 million housing project, which was
launched in 2014, was officially opened by former president Jacob Zuma in April
last year. Sixty percent of the R353 million came from a
government housing grant while the balance was raised through loans. By late Monday afternoon it was not yet clear
whether Capital City Housing intends enforcing the court interdict it obtained
to force the veterans out. The NPC’s chief executive, Ivor Caldecott, could
not be reached for comment. The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the province said
it will be demanding answers from Human Settlements MEC Ravi Pillay on the
invasion. “The DA expects MEC Ravi Pillay to explain how
matters were allowed to deteriorate to this point and to act to rectify them,”
DA provincial human settlements spokesperson George Mari said.