A Pietermaritzburg woman is lucky to be alive after she was abducted by six men, driven around, robbed at gunpoint and ordered to take off her bra and unzip her pants. Nombuzo Zulu, a senior administrative clerk, had heard gory stories of women being hijacked, raped and killed and feared the worst. “During all of this, I kept asking myself ‘is this really happening to me?’, she said. The harrowing ordeal took place on Friday night just after 9 pm when Zulu was driving to meet up with a friend. Zulu drove past a
group of men standing on the street. “There is a tavern on
that road and I just thought those men were going there,” she said. Less than three
seconds after passing the group of men, she was ambushed. “As I drove over the
speed hump, suddenly these guys came running and they just started banging on
the windows of my car.” Before she could get
out, the six men got inside the car. “The first thing I
said was ‘Okay, let me just get out, you can take the car’,” she told The
Witness. She said they called
her a b**** and forced her into the back seat indicating that they wanted to go
with her. Zulu said one man got
into the driver’s seat while the others sat in the back with her and forced her
to lie down with her head on the lap of one of the hijackers. The terrified mother
of one said she was then told to co-operate or she would die. “The one guy turned
slightly to show me a gun. It could have been a real gun, a toy or mock gun,
but after that I knew things were serious.” Zulu, who is
recovering from the trauma, spent almost an hour with her abductors trying to
escape and find her way to safety. “I asked them what
they wanted but they just swore at me and told me to shut up.” She said the men, who
looked like they were in their late twenties, then asked her where the tracker
button was placed in the car. “I told them I didn’t
know. They swore at me and the one with the gun jabbed it into my ribs.” About 20 minutes into
the high speed drive, they ended up at a secluded spot near the Azalea area
outside Edendale. She said the men were
panicking and it didn’t look like they knew where they were going. “We stopped somewhere
dark on the side of the road and they pulled me out of the car. One of them
dragged me into a nearby bush and ordered me to take off my pants.” She complied, and as
she was undressing, the driver indicated to the other guys to check that no one
was coming. “I saw an elderly
woman walking past. I wanted to scream but that man blocked my mouth and told
me not to move. “The driver then said
they didn’t need any more trouble and that he feared the car was being tracked
by police. “Before they left,
one of them said they shouldn’t just leave me. He suggested they rape me and
then ditch me at another location, but the others argued with him.” Zulu had a lucky
escape and was not raped. Her attackers drove
her back to Edendale, made off with her valuables, including her cellphone and
wallet, and then left her with the car. “They ransacked the
car and took everything they wanted. I was so shaken. I thought I was going to
die. I’m glad that I escaped unharmed,” said Zulu, who looked drained. “I just want to
recover and forget about this incident. If and when these men are caught, I
don’t even know what suitable punishment they deserve. For now, I want to recover.” Plessislaer police
station spokesperson Captain Musa Ntombela confirmed that they were
investigating a charge of armed robbery. 