A Pietermaritzburg motorist who tried to wriggle out of a
traffic fine, only succeeded in getting himself into more trouble. The Social Development employee, who cannot be named, was
issued with a R500 traffic fine for not wearing a seat belt, but instead of
paying it, he tore it up. The fine was issued by traffic officers, under the Public
Transport Enforcement Unit (PTEU) who were conducting law enforcement duties on
Thursday morning at the Masukwane Taxi Rank. Chris van Biljon, chief provincial inspector of the PTEU,
said the officers stopped a white VW Golf in the vicinity of the taxi rank to
issue the driver with a fine. Van Biljon said the officers then left the scene. A short
while later, however, they returned to the same spot to find the fine torn into
pieces. “When they picked up the pieces and put them back together, they
realised that the summons number was the same one they had issued to the
motorist. They then went to the office and did a bit of investigating on our
computer system.” He said they managed to trace the owner of the car through
its registration number. “What was even more shocking was that the motorist
information that came up did not match that on the summons. The driver had
given the traffic officer false information.” After a two-hour investigation, the traffic officers went to
the motorist’s house where they were pointed to his place of employment. He was eventually arrested and charged with defeating the
ends of justice, failing to wear his seatbelt and furnishing the traffic
officers with false information. Pietermaritzburg police station spokesperson Captain Khosi
Khonjelwayo confirmed the arrest and said that the motorist was released on
warning. Van Biljon said the motorist told them he tore up the fine
out of “frustration”. “We take all traffic offences seriously because we are
trying to minimise the carnage on the roads. People will think that taxi
drivers are the worst on the roads but everyone contributes to road deaths,
even the minor offences. “This motorist took a minor offence and escalated it to a
point where he possibly faces jail time.” Van Biljon said it was worrying that some motorists failed
to obey the simple rules of the road. “People have this general attitude towards traffic officers
that we are out there to punish them unnecessarily. They are not looking at the
bigger picture; the bigger picture is everyone’s life is at risk.” He warned motorists not to undermine traffic officers and
not try to evade traffic fines. “If as a motorist you are required to hand over
your details, give the officer the correct information ... if you don’t, it can
compound to charges at a later stage. Take the fine, go to court and deal with
it,” he added. Speaking to Weekend Witness, the 27-year-old motorist, who
will be going to court on Tuesday, said he felt victimised. “I accepted my ticket because I knew I was in the wrong. I
was still going to pay the fine. “I didn’t disrespect the officer because I didn’t do this in
his presence. There was overloading of taxis next to me but he just targeted
me,” he said.