Hundreds of ANC activists are expected to descend on the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court as six people held in connection with the murder of former ANC activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu appear for a bail application on Thursday. Activists in the Moses Mabhida region are planning a picket and a mini rally outside court where leaders of the tripartite alliance — SACP, Cosatu and Sanco — will make speeches after the court appearance. Mchunu, who was the convener of the aggrieved branches in the Moses Mabhida region, was shot and killed in May this year. The former ward councillor had led several marches calling for the disbandment of the ANC regional executive committee prior to his death. Six people were arrested in connection with his murder. The accused are ward 10 councillor Nkosinathi “TK” Gambu, his cousin Gift Zungu, Gambu’s personal assistant Sfiso Mbelu and members of the ANC branch executive committee Skhanyiso Zimu, Mlungisi Zimu and Ayanda Ngubane. One of the organisers of Thurday’s activities, Siyabonga Hlongwa, said they would shut down the CBD. “We have mobilised members from all the branches to attend [today’s] events. We are expecting three members of the national executive committee to attend the court appearance. Our message is clear: no bail must be given to the accused,” he said. ANC Women’s League regional chairperson Ntombizodwa Phoswa said they expected their members to paint the court black and green. “We had a meeting on Sunday with all the branch secretaries and chairpersons of our 54 branches. We agreed that we must mobilise support in branches and we are expecting all the seven sub-regions to be represented. “We will be there to support the Mchunu wives and the entire Mchunu family. As the Women’s League, we do not believe that people should be killed for holding different view to others,” she said. Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said Old Market Street and Church Street between Chief Albert Luthuli Street and Boshoff Street will be closed off to all traffic from 8 am until 1pm. “Traffic will be diverted away from the court precinct. The Msunduzi traffic police will be in full force and on point duty to assist motorists, divert traffic and ensure the safety of road users.” Police did not respond to queries on their plans to monitor proceedings.