“It is unbelievable that something so terrible should happen to a someone who was such a good person.” Those were the words of Neville Hardman, whose brother-in-law, Campbell Scott (66), was shot and killed on his smallholding, Lynafis, in the Creighton area, in the early hours of Saturday morning. Scott was reportedly woken up at around 3 am after hearing a noise. As he walked down the passage to investigate he was shot by one of three armed men who had broken into the house. The robbers then entered the main bedroom where Scott’s wife, Pam, was sleeping. “They shone a torch in her eyes and told her to stay still,” Hardman said. “They then started searching for guns and money. My sister told them there were no guns and no cash on the premises, [but] they made her open the safe to show them. “They then tied her hands and tied her to a door before they started pulling out drawers and searching through cupboards.” The intruders eventually made off with three laptops, two cellphones and other belongings. After the men left, Pam managed to free herself and drove to get help from Magma security staff who were guarding the Weatherboard premises in Creigh­ton, a short distance from her home. “Pam spoke to the guards and they helped her. They also phoned us and we drove out to help as well,” Hardman said. The Scotts had four children, Murray, Duncan, Robbie and Craig, three daughters-in-law and several grandchildren, all of whom have been left devastated by the death of their father and grandfather. Hardman said Scott had been a popular member of the local community. “He worked as an accountant for the local farmers and other businesses in the district,” he added. “Campbell was always willing to help people. He would never have hurt anyone, so what happened to him is completely wrong.” Hardman said the community in Creighton had rallied round the family to offer comfort and support. “They have been amazing ... the police and Magma Security ...” he said. Captain Nqobile Gwala told The Witness that Scott had sustained a gunshot wound to the right armpit. He was declared dead at the scene. A case of house robbery and murder is being investigated by Creighton SAPS. No arrests had been made at the time of going to press.