The “vicious” speed bump that was put up on Old Howick Road overnight on Friday, to the ire of many locals, has been flattened. But before a grader got busy on the bump on Monday, it was clear from the multiple gouges and scrapes on the bump that it had already taken its toll on many cars that encountered it. Hilton locals had taken to their community WhatsApp group to complain and express their concerns over the height of the bump and its lack of visibility. One Hilton resident said in the community WhatsApp group: “If you’re travelling down Old Howick Road be very aware of a new, vicious speed hump between the two old ones. “If taken at more than 10 km/h it will rip your sump out.” Another man wrote: “Silly that there are no warnings. But that corner needed a traffic calming measure. Hopefully some signage gets put up because the paint being used on our roads is pathetic stuff. Fades rapidly.” Other community members commented on how the bump was on a bend and a blind rise, and could be hazardous in the dark or mist. They also asked if it complies with the Department of Transport’s rules and regulations. However, some were happy that the speed bump was built. Old Howick Road resident Rosemary Scott said she had been asking for a speed bump on the road for just over a decade. In 2014, a truck transporting 50 000 newly-hatched chicks lost control and went through the barrier of Scott’s house. “I had a dead man in my garden and 50 000 half mangled chicks everywhere. I have almost been killed many times by cars flying around the corner. “Two months ago, a car swerved and broke my gardener’s leg. There have been about 10 accidents on that bend which is why I have been calling for the hump.” DA ward councillor Craig Millar said there are other speed humps along the road that had been flattened over the years and all the uMngeni Municipality needed to do was to repair the current speed humps. “This is a major arterial road and speed humps are not indicated on these types of roads. “Procedure was not followed. It went up overnight.” Millar said that if one was driving at 60 km/h, one should be able to see a speed hump 130 m in front of them. “The bump is in the shade so people travelling up Old Howick Road cannot see it until they are just before it.” On Monday, when The Witness went to look at the speed bump, uMngeni staff were already busy flattening it. “Their plan seems to be to lower the bump. “However, that is not the problem. uMngeni have basically wasted time and resources by not conducting a proper assessment and implementing traffic calming and safety measures as part of a larger holistic plan. That’s possibly because there is currently no plan,” Millar said. uMngeni Municipality spokesperson Thando Mgaga did not respond to queries.