A Northdale mother has told how her 11-year-old son may have narrowly escaped being kidnapped on Friday afternoon. Alvena Deepnarain said her son, who is in Grade 5, was waiting for his transport outside school at the corner of Ghandi and Ramlingum roads just after 2 pm. “His transport was a few minutes late and there was no one on the road as most children wait for their transport at the stalls across the road. “A black BMW with just the driver in it approached him. He later told me he had seen the vehicle parked in the area on Monday. “The man rolled down the window [and] said, ‘Boy, your mother said I must come pick you up. Come’.” Deepnarain said her son told the man that he was lying but the man kept on insisting that he was sent to pick him up. “My son was frightened. He started running down Ramlingum Road to the school. When he turned back the car was following him. It had no number plate.” The boy ran into the school and went to the office but after not finding any teachers there, used another exit from the school. His transport was already waiting for him at the usual spot. The black BMW was nowhere to be seen. “I am just grateful that he was brave enough to run back into the school ... [he said] he had seen rope lying on the passenger seat.” Deepnarain said she always drummed it into her children that they should not believe strangers who claim to have been sent by her or her husband to fetch them at school. She encouraged them to be “vigilant and observant”. Deepnarain has now had to change her work schedule to be able to fetch her son from school. “He said ‘Mummy, I don’t want to go back to school’, so now I have to make sure I am waiting for him outside the school even before the siren goes off,” she said. Deepnarain advised other parents and schools to warn their children and teach them how to react in similar situations. A woman, who asked not to be named and stays on Jupiter Road, a block away from Greenhill Primary, told The Witness that a man who matched the description given by Deepnarain’s son, came to her house on Tuesday night. “It was just after 7 pm. He said he was sent to pick up a child from TPA Primary and asked if we could help him find the child. When we asked for the name of the child or the parents’ details he was unable to tell us anything. “He asked if there were any primary school children on our road and if our neighbours had young children. We found this very strange and told him all the children in our area were big kids,” said the woman. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said an attempted kidnapping case was opened at Mountain Rise police station and that the serious and violent crime unit was investigating the matter. “We appeal to any members of the public to contact the police immediately if they see this suspicious vehicle in the area,” Ebrahim said.