Are our pupils and our teachers safe in the schoolyard? The answer seems to be no, with school violence seemingly on
the rise. School parent bodies and education experts say the increased
level of violence in society is manifesting itself in schoolyard assaults and
brawls and the use of corporal punishment, despite it being banned, this in the
wake of a series of disturbing videos and violent outbursts at schools that
have emerged in recent months. According to South Africa’s regulatory board for teachers,
it has noted a slight increase in the number of corporal punishment cases,
sexual abuse of both male and female pupils in schools, and the assault of
teachers within the school environment. In its 2016/17 annual report, the South African Council for
Educators (Sace) said that it had received 678 reported incidents. Of these
cases, 113 were for verbal abuse and harassment, while 99 were for sexual
misconduct and 256 for corporal punishment. KwaZulu-Natal ranked second highest for sexual misconduct
cases, with Mpumalanga being first. There were 18 such
cases reported in KZN and 25 in Mpumalanga. Despite publicity, it is evidence that many teachers are
still applying corporal punishment and some still abuse pupils sexually, the
report found. There are also cases of physical assaults between teachers. Schoolyard violence
has dominated news headlines over recent weeks. In the most recent incident in Durban, two pupils were
stabbed to death at a high school in KwaMakhutha. Masakhaneni High School pupils Mangaliso Mbatha (18) in
Grade 10 and Sihle Mngadi (20) in Grade 11, had allegedly tried to separate
pupils fighting over a cellphone when they were stabbed to death. In another incident, a youngster from a secondary school in
Inanda was reportedly stabbed a number of times by fellow pupils. He was rushed to a hospital near the school where he died of
his injuries. According to two 2012 Centre for Justice and Crime
Prevention surveys, 44,3% of threats, 51% of assaults, 54,2% of sexual
assaults, 60,2% of robberies and 91,5% of thefts took place in a classroom. The next highest place of danger was a sports field, where
25% of threats took place, 24,8% of assaults, 13,2% of sexual assaults, 14% of
robberies and 4,6% of thefts took place. Other locations included corridors, toilets, school gate
areas, other open grounds, halls and a small proportion in a principal’s office. Department of Basic Education spokesperson Elijah Mhlanga
said social media has drawn public attention to the issue of bullying but it
doesn’t mean incidents are necessarily increasing. “Plans are in place, though,
to address the perception of increased violence between classmates. Training
manuals on how to prevent harassment, including cyber and homophobic bullying,
have been handed out to schools, as well as e-guides,” he said. The department said that girls are more likely to be afraid
while travelling to and from school. Of the female pupils who were surveyed,
18,1% confirmed this, compared to 13,7% of the 
boys. The department also found that 13,6% of girls feared
specific places at schools that are “hot spots for violence”, while 9,8% of
boys surveyed had similar fears. When it comes to corporal punishment, the nine provinces
fare differently, according to the 2016/17 Sace report. The Western Cape recorded the highest number of pupils, 168,
who fell victim to corporal punishment in 2016 and 2017, while KwaZulu-Natal
was second with 25 cases. Mhlanga stressed that corporal punishment is illegal despite
it occurring often in rural areas. According to reports, police have linked 23 064 schools to a
designated police station nationally. This gives school principals a direct line to their police
station if a situation requires it. A total of 1 780 schools countrywide are not linked. Meanwhile, 20% of South Africa’s teachers believe that
schools are violent places and suspect their pupils and colleagues are armed. The Witness has previously reported that teachers at Smero
Secondary School were afraid of pupils who allegedly smuggled knives, dagga and
other drugs into the school. In one incident in March, a Grade 11 pupil was injured when
he was stabbed by another pupil inside the school. In March last year, Priscilla Mchunu, who was the acting
principal at Laduma High School in Edendale, was gunned down in front of her
Grade 12 pupils during a weekend lesson. No one has been arrested for her
murder. In 2015, Villa Maria Primary School principal Nokuthula
Magwanyana was found slain in her car on Table Mountain Road. The Witness reported then that it was suspected that
Magwanyana was killed by a group who had been trying to intimidate her into
resigning.  LEFT: Slain Laduma High School deputy principal Priscilla Thembelihle Mchunu. RIGHT: Villa Maria Primary School principal Nokuthula Magwanyana was murdered in 2015. According to a survey conducted by the Human Sciences
Research Council with the Department of Education in 2017, more than 20 000
teachers at 1 380 schools across the country believed that schools are violence
places and suspected that their pupils and colleagues were armed. About 17% of teachers reported fights involving weapons at
school and almost 13% of teachers believed gangs operate in their schools. Most reported violence occurring between pupils or between a
pupil and a teacher. SA Democratic Teachers’ Union spokesperson Mugwena Maluleke
said: “Teachers feel unsafe in our schools. The young ones in particular. “Violence is why they resign, not only the low salary.” National Professional Teachers’ Organisation (Aptos)
president Basil Manuel said: “The number of incidents of violence by pupils
against teachers has rocketed because these are vastly underreported. “I think
there is far more violence against teachers than is being reported.” He said the reason appears to be that teachers are
embarrassed to report such cases. “They don’t want their colleagues to know
that they have been smacked by a child. “But these incidents are symptoms of society. All over South
Africa, society is violent. We can’t expect that our children will be
different‚” said Manuel. Manuel said many teachers who were traumatised by violence
have resigned. He said the “respect environment [in the classroom] has been
damaged”. Some teachers go for counselling after violent incidents but
others “don’t want to be recognised as having been manhandled or defeated [by
pupils]. Even the process of counselling, they see it as an embarrassment‚” he
said. Sace spokesperson Themba Ndlovu said something drastic has
to be done to curb violence in schools. “We are making a call to the school governing bodies to take
very stern action. Our teachers are raising these issues with us and it is
unthinkable.” Curbing school violence requires effort from more than just
schools Parent bodies and education experts told Weekend Witness
that school violence is getting worse and drastic action is needed to curb the
issue. The experts claim that pupils have a “don’t care” attitude
towards “violence and its consequences” because they are not punished severely
enough for their behaviour. They also said access to cellphones during school
hours is making the problem worse as the incidents are recorded and give pupils
“instant fame”, which encourages their behaviour. “The sad reality is that the violence is getting worse. It
is becoming both more frequent and the nature of the attacks is increasingly
disturbing,” said SafeSchool founder and director Megan Harrington-Johnson. She said the biggest challenge was that South Africa has yet
to develop specific laws to curb school violence and make it punishable by law. “Individuals simply either do not know or appreciate the
legal consequences of school violence,” Harrington-Johnson added. She said schools need to have up-to-date security measures
in place to ensure that pupils are properly searched and stripped of any
weapons before entering the premises. National Association of School Governing Bodies chief
executive officer Anthea Cereseto said role modelling in society portrayed
violence as a solution. “We don’t have nuanced perspective and we don’t have
the ability to think of consequences of action. Unfortunately, anger and
violence is a very easy response. “We have no hope of peaceful school discipline unless we
change our manner of responding,” she said. How much is enough security? Earlier this year, the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) called
for metal detectors and CCTV to be installed at schools in KwaZulu-Natal after
reports that pupils were smuggling dangerous weapons into schools.  Pupils are checked for dangerous weapons before entering their place of learning.PHOTO: The Western Journal IFP spokesperson on Education Thembeni Madlopha-Mthethwa
said the uncontrollable levels of gangsterism and number of ill-disciplined
pupils, fights between pupils, and weapon smuggling was getting out of hand. “Pupils attend schools with dangerous weapons and drugs in
their bags, while others become serious drug mules and even merchants,” said
Madlopha-Mthethwa She called for those turning schools into “war zones” to be
arrested and disciplined, saying: “We are no longer sitting on a ticking bomb.
It has already started exploding.” In his latest budget policy presentation, KZN MEC for
Education, Mthandweni Dlungwane said the department had engaged the services of
Umbimbi Lwamabutho in a bid to make schools safe again. The MEC also stated
that while there were some schools in the province with security guards, this
should not be a permanent solution. “Schools are a microcosm of our society and every social ill
that plagues society finds itself on our school premises. This is why we have
always maintained that fighting violence in schools and dealing with issues of
safety should be a societal responsibility,” he said. Crispin Hemson of the International Centre of Nonviolence
was hesitant to suggest that schools should be using resources to strengthen
security, saying: “In the end you can only be as secure as people are committed
to working together. It may be that practically some schools have to go that
route, but it is a great failure.”