“Do not provoke us.
We have military training and don’t want to get to a point where we resort to a
coup.” This is the strong warning from uMkhonto weSizwe
ex-combatants to municipalities who have failed to meet the MK vets’ demands
for tenders, jobs and housing. In an interview with Weekend Witness, MK vets regional
secretary Menzi Mkhize said they felt they were being pushed into a corner by
the refusal of some councils to give them what they say is due to them. In the
past two months, the MK vets have shut down five Midlands councils to demand
jobs, tenders and housing, and have threatened to continue disrupting services
if their demands are not met. Mkhize said the MK vets were capable of executing a coup
because of all the military training they received while in exile and warned
they did not want the situation to get to that point. “I think former president
Jacob Zuma wanted to avoid a coup when he established the Department of
Military Veterans. He is a military veteran himself and he knows what kind of
training we received and what we are capable of,” he said. Mkhize said the department, established by Zuma in 2009, had
failed to assist many military veterans who he said were living in poverty. “If you can go to Aloe Ridge now where we invaded flats,
some military veterans will tell you that they have gone days without eating.
Most military veterans are surviving on hand outs. “Our children are even asking us what we went to exile for
if we cannot provide for our families. When we sing struggle songs while taking
a shower, our children tell us to stop making a noise because they don’t know
which country we fought for because we are dying poor,” he said. Mkhize, who spent years in Uganda receiving military
training after joining uMkhonto weSizwe in 1988, said they had high hopes when
they finally came home after the 1994 elections, believing their lives would be
better. “Remember, we never received any salaries when we were in
exile. There was no one looking after our families. “When I came back in 1994 with other military veterans, we
expected to receive money and housing. This was informed by experiences in
other countries where there had been liberation struggles. “Military veterans were given houses, money, some went to
businesses and some were given jobs. “In our case, we were never integrated properly back to society.
They tried to integrate us into the SA National Defence Force but it never
worked. We did not even receive counselling when we came back after going
through such traumatic experiences, where some of our comrades died while
executing some operations,” he said. Mkhize said some of the Midlands councils that they had
brought to a standstill recently — including Msunduzi, uMgungundlovu, Richmond
and Umvoti — were now co-operating. “We have a situation where municipalities such as uMshwathi
have invited us to meet to prevent a situation where there would be a protest,”
he said. “Only Mooi-Mpofana Municipality is giving us a headache. We
are hoping they will come to their senses and withdraw the court interdict they
obtained against us as the organisation. Department of Community Safety and Liaison spokesperson
Mluleki Mtungwa said the department was not taking lightly all the threats
posed by the group that was involved in disrupting services in the province. “There is a sub-committee that has been established by the
cabinet which will be led by MEC Mxolisi Kaunda. The sub-committee will be
dealing with all the illegal activities, including the invading of projects by
business forums. We take these issues very serious,” he said.