The search continues for the missing Prestbury girl, Naledi Zondo (12), who disappeared on Monday afternoon. Her distraught mother, Nokulunga Zondo, has once again urged the public to help her find her daughter. She said there were currently no leads as all those which looked promising ended up as dead ends. “There were several search parties by community members yesterday [Tuesday] but they all yielded no results. My daughter is still missing,” she said. Zondo said she was losing her mind not knowing where her daughter was. “I feel like I’m going crazy. I feel numb inside. I am just praying that wherever my daughter is, she is alive and okay. I’m sad and feel hopeless as there is no trail of where she might have gone,” said Zondo. The Prestbury Primary School pupil was last seen by her relatives at her home on Mayor’s Walk around 5 pm and her mother has reason to believe that the youngster might have run away from home. Naledi was last seen wearing blue jeans, a black sweater with pink piping on the front and silver takkies. Her hair is plaited into three lines and she has a small scar on her upper lip. Zondo thanked the Prestbury ward councillor, Ross Strachan, who organised community members to help look for Naledi, as well as the community themselves, police, the media and everyone who is helping with the search. “I know everybody is doing their best to put the word out there and help find my child and for that I am beyond grateful and appreciate all efforts. It’s comforting to know that the people around me have not left me to worry alone, everybody is trying to help,” she said. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a missing persons case was opened. “Members of the police search and rescue team are investigating and searching for the child along with other police members.” Ngobese urged anyone with any information of Naledi’s whereabouts to contact him on 082 826 8954 or to contact Sergeant Xolisile Makhaza on 076 929 946 or Captain Moodley on 079 5000 397.