A 20-year-old white rhino was killed and dehorned by
poachers while her six-year-old calf, who had been shot in the shoulder,
escaped certain death at a KwaZulu-Natal reserve on September 6. Conservationists and staff of the park, who had spotted the
injured calf, captured her last week to treat the bullet wound to her shoulder. Wildlife vet Dr Dave Cooper said they released the rhino
back into the reserve to see how she would respond to treatment in the wild,
however, Cooper noticed that the rhino “was battling”. So, a decision was taken
to move her to a boma with other orphaned rhinos. Cooper said the recovery process would take months, adding
that white rhino do not do well if they are on their own in a boma. Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife spokesperson Musa Mntambo said that in
2016, 148 rhinos had been poached in the province. In 2017, this number
increased dramatically to 202. This year, to date, 90 rhinos have been killed, suggesting
that there has been a decline in poaching. However, Cooper said fewer rhino were being shot because
there are less rhino in the province than there were a few years ago. “Poachers
now have to look for the rhino and will sometimes have to walk very far and
deep into bush before they see one. “This means there is a greater chance of them being caught.” Cooper added that the number of arrests of poachers had also
increased but he was uncertain how many of those arrests were actual
convictions. “The amount of convictions is a true reflection of the situation,”
said Cooper. He added that rhino cows birthed calves every three years,
meaning the rate at which rhino are being poached is greater than the number of
rhino being born. Cooper said law enforcement has definitely become more
effective, which has contributed to the increased arrest rate. According to the Hoedspruit Endangered Species Centre
(HESC), more than 7 000 African rhinos have been lost to poaching in the last
decade. HESC said 1 175 rhinos were killed nationally in 2015. “Despite a 10,3% decrease in rhino poaching in 2016,
poaching statistics released by the Department of Environmental Affairs in
February 2017 show that  the rhino
population of South Africa remains at risk of extinction unless more is done to
stop poachers in their tracks.” On Thursday, police released a statement welcoming the
arrest of seven alleged rhino poaching kingpins by the Directorate for Priority
Crime Investigation (DPCI) in Mpumalanga. With World Rhino Day being today, the World Wide Fund for
Nature South Africa (WWF-SA) said their concerns over rhino poaching also
extended to the communities and people affected by it. “Illegal wildlife trade not only harms rhino, it also
impacts on people living around the parks,” said a statement by the WWF-SA.
“Our protected areas are often situated in the midst of poor communities.
Criminal syndicates who drive the illicit horn trade become connected to these
vulnerable communities where poaching can be seen as a solution to economic
hardship.” WWF South Africa Wildlife Programme senior manager Dr Jo
Shaw said SA’s rhinos remain the focus of international wildlife trafficking
networks. She said it was vital that police work together with communities to
disrupt these networks so thorough investigations can lead to successful prosecutions.