The council has resolved to institute disciplinary action
against suspended City boss Sizwe Hadebe following the tabling of a report
alleging high-level graft in his office. On Friday an independent investigator, Sithembele Mhlanga
presented his findings to council after a month-long probe into allegations of
contraventions of the Municipal Systems Act and Municipal Financial Management
Act. While the report was dealt with as a “confidential item”
Weekend Witness was told by council sources the contents are far-reaching. They include allegations that Hadebe increased his annual
salary by R500 000 without following processes and is alleged to have also
inflated prices for contracts. A property earmarked for a cemetery was originally valuated
to be worth R1,5 million and only 40% of it was found to be suitable for burial
but Hadebe allegedly duped council into paying R27 million for it. Hadebe also allegedly misled the council into paying for his
accommodation while he was acting even though he had five properties in
Msunduzi. The voice on the damning audio clip that was leaked to the
media in April was also confirmed in the report to be Hadebe’s. The recording captured a senior official being instructed to
manipulate interview scores in favour of Khanyisile Shoba to secure her
appointment as a senior manager for asset and liabilities. This was apparently done on the instruction of the deputy
mayor Thobani Zuma but both he and Shoba have denied this. Mayor Themba Njilo said Hadebe would be served with a notice
of disciplinary hearing and extension of his suspension soon. He would then
have seven days to respond as to why the council should not go ahead with its
resolution. Opposition parties and some ANC councillors welcomed Mhlanga’s
report. They were however concerned that it was one-sided as Hadebe did not get
his opportunity to give his version of events to Mhlanga. Apparently Hadebe was
invited to come forward but never did. “It’s not nice when we have to tell the ANC councillor that
we told them so and they never listened. “Hadebe should have never been appointed as the municipal
manager because even his secondment was irregular,” said DA caucus leader
Sibongiseni Majola. He said they want Hadebe to tell his side of the story so
that people he allegedly colluded with can also be exposed. His sentiments were echoed by IFP’s Thinasonke Ntombela who
said the rot goes deeper than what was alluded in Mhlanga’s report. “We are happy with this report but want an extensive
investigation across the municipality so that we can get an idea of the extent
of the corruption in Msunduzi. Things started going south before Hadebe came so
let’s not pretend that all that is wrong is on his head,” he said. ACDP councillor Reinus Niemand said: “Hadebe didn’t fall
from the sky. He was brought here by Cogta and did what he did at the
instruction of the most senior politicians so they must also face the music
along with him”. Attempts to get comment from Hadebe were unsuccessful.