Umgungundlovu deputy mayor Fucwana Zungu, whose son and nephew are amongst the six people accused of the murder of PMB ANC activist, Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu, on Wednesday hit out at party members implicating her in the killing. “My heart is sore, it pains me to hear my own comrades accuse me of such a despicable crime. I have never hired any hit men — my hands are clean. It could as well be that those accusing me of murder are attempting to deflect police investigations,” she said. Mchunu, a former Msunduzi Municipality councillor, was shot several times as he pulled into his driveway in kwaPata near Imbali in May. Zungu’s son, Gift Zungu, and nephew, Nkosinathi Gambu, who is also an Msunduzi councillor, are among the six accused who appeared at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court in connection with Mchunu’s murder. The uMgungundlovu deputy was in court on Monday to give her “two sons” moral support. “Everything went fine inside the court but as we left after the matter had been adjourned some ANC members started shouting at me and accusing me of hiring the people who killed Maqatha. “Maqatha was like a son to me. I introduced him into politics. How can I turn around and get him killed?” she said. When The Witness visited Zungu at her KwaPata home on Wednesday afternoon, the ANC deputy mayor was in a sombre mood. “Yes, it is true that I hired a lawyer for my two sons but that doesn’t mean I’m protecting them from the law. “All I want is justice for them — the law should run its course. If the courts find that they have done something wrong, then they should pay,” she said. Despite Zungu’s references to Mchunu being like her own son, the ANC deputy mayor was conspicuous by her absence at the former ANC activist’s funeral in May. “The very same people who were hauling insults at me in court on Monday barred me from attending the funeral. They said I should not attend as I’m the same person who hired people to kill Maqatha. “The truth is that people are targeting me for political reasons. They are trying to get the community to question my integrity. Unfortunately for them, the community knows me very well and my track record as a representative committed to clean government and service delivery is well known,” she said. Gambu and Gift, who works for a security company linked to the uMgungundlovu District Municipality, were charged with Mchunu’s murder along with Skhanyiso Zimu, Sfiso Mbelu, Mlungisi Zimu and Ayanda Ngubane.  ANC councillor Nkosinathi Gambu and Gift Zungu in the dock on Monday. It has since emerged that Mbelu is Gambu’s personal assistant (PA) while Ngubane, Mlungisi and Skhanyiso Zimu were ANC Branch Executive Committee (BEC) members in the area. At the time of his killing Mchunu was the face of the campaign by a section of ANC members in the Moses Mabhida region to expose corruption and maladministration in municipalities such as uMgungundlovu and Msunduzi. “It is a well-known fact political killings have been an ongoing thing in the Moses Mabhida Region. “We are all hoping that the courts will tell us who really killed Maqatha,” Zungu said. A former member of the ANC Regional Executive Committee (REC) Zungu said she was yet to be questioned by police despite rumours linking her to Mchunu’s murder. “The honest truth is that nobody has questioned me about Maqatha’s murder,” she said. Two more suspects arrested for Mchunu murder While police have declined to comment on the case, The Witness has been reliably informed that two more suspects had been arrested in connection with Mchunu’s murder. “The two other suspects will appear at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate Court during the course of the week,” a source close to the police team investigating Mchunu’s murder said.