A man who has tried for two years to get Msunduzi Municipality to tell him where his impounded car is, will hopefully have some luck now. On Thursday the Pietermaritzburg high court granted Siphiwe Dube an order directing the municipality and traffic officer, Sabelo Mbanjwa, to return his Toyota RunX within 14 days. If they are unable to comply with the order then they have to disclose the exact location of where the car is kept. The sheriff of the court has also been given the go-ahead to remove the car from wherever it is. The vehicle was stolen in Durban and recovered in Pietermaritzburg. Dube said in court papers that in January 2016, he was at home when he heard “some strange noise coming from outside”. When he peeped through the window, he saw his car being driven away by someone he did not know. He reported the theft to the Bellair Police Station. Six months later, Mbanjwa, the traffic officer, called him and said the vehicle has been found in Pietermaritzburg. Dube was then asked to come to the city with documentation to prove he was the owner of the vehicle, which he did. He found out that the car was recovered from a woman who said she bought it from a car dealer in Durban for R50 000. Mbanjwa told Dube that the vehicle had to be sent to the police pound in Mkondeni and that he should collect it after a week. But when he went there, he was told the car was not there. Dube said he tried to contact the traffic officer but could not reach him. He then went to the man’s office where he was told that the car was sent to the pound. He returned there again, only to find out that the records indicated that it was not received. Fed-up, he got a police friend of his to help him track down the car. That too failed. Eventually he was told by the traffic officer that the car had been released but he did not know where it was. Desperate for answers, Dube turned to his attorney who wrote to the Msunduzi Traffic Department to find out where the car is. A response was received in April last year saying that a preliminary investigation will be conducted to determine the merits of the complaint, and that it will be referred to the legal division. He said his attorney had received no useful feedback afterwards. Further attempts to get information proved unsuccessful. The municipality did not file any papers regarding this matter.