Although a nine-year-old boy could not remember what he told police and a psychologist, he was unyielding in his assertion that his guidance counsellor had sexually abused and raped him. The boy was cross-examined on Wednesday in the Pietermaritzburg high court by advocate Shane Matthews, acting for Darren Goddard. Goddard is charged with having sexually assaulted and raped boys while he was a counsellor at a primary school, which he denies. In the course of his evidence the young boy told the court that Goddard has a birth mark on his penis. He drew a picture of Goddard with the mark on a piece of paper, which was handed to Judge Kate Pillay. During cross examination by the defence, the boy remained adamant that Goddard has such a birth mark, despite being challenged about it by the defence. Matthews said: “Goddard was taken to a doctor who examined him and his penis and the doctor and Goddard tell us there is no birthmark on his penis”. The boy responded: “I saw it there”. Matthews questioned him about what he said in a statement to “uncle Neil”, the investigating officer, in June 2016. He said he could not remember. Matthews went on saying he told the officer that he got hurt when someone threw a ball on his behind. The boy said he could not remember what he said. Rephrasing of the question and further attempts by the advocate to elicit answers about the statement were met with “I can’t remember” from the child. Matthews also asked him if he remembered an incident where another boy pulled down his pants at school, to which the child replied no. Pressed about it, the boy said “no, I can’t remember. I don’t know”. The child on Wednesday did not retract what he said the previous day about the school headmaster also sexually abusing him and taking pictures. The boy added on Wednesday that he and the headmaster were alone once when the headmaster also did “bad things” to him. Matthews said the headmaster has said he will “not even be able to say who you are”. In reply the child raised his voice and said, “He does know me”. The advocate also said police searched the headmaster’s and Goddard’s offices and homes and no photos of the child were found. The boy said they could have been deleted. At one stage Matthews asked: “If you are asked a question and you don’t remember the answer, will you say anything?” The boy said yes. He also said he could not recall telling a psychologist that there was a knife, gun and bullet with blood in Goddard’s safe that made him afraid. A second boy, aged 12 years, has now taken the witness stand. The state alleges he too was raped many times in 2015 and 2016. He told the court that Goddard did “naughty things” to him and described being touched inappropriately. Illustrating how Goddard held him, he crossed his arms elbow to elbow around his neck, saying he could not breathe when Goddard did this to him. He said he did not like what Goddard used to do to him. He did not cry because he did not want to “embarrass” himself. The boy said he did not tell his parents at the time because Goddard was “naughty” and “will come and hit my parents”. The child will be cross-examined on Thursday.