A group of concerned residents, animal lovers and even police came together on Heritage Day to capture a stray dog with a plastic container stuck on its head for four days. Raisethorpe resident Bindu Harry said there is a small pack of dogs living wild in a thick, grassy area near the Protea Grounds in Raisethorpe that she and non-profit organisation Pietermaritzburg Animal Rescue and Rehome (PARR) feed and deworm regularly. Harry, who feeds the dogs in the morning, said she spotted the stray dog, which she named Flops, with a large plastic container stuck over its head on Friday. “I called the SPCA and told the PARR group about Flops.” She said the SPCA came out on Friday but could not find the dog. “She lives with her mother and two sisters. I could hear her clunking into things in the bush when I went to feed the other dogs.” PARR’s Anitha Lutchman said that Warrant Officer Jay Marian and Constable Zakes Sithole from the Pietermaritzburg K9 Unit also went out to help find Flops on Saturday evening. “Unfortunately Flops also managed to evade rescue on Saturday evening,” said Lutchman, who thanked the officers for trying. She said that on Monday morning PARR volunteers as well as concerned residents and two members of the Public Order Police launched a two-hour search in the wind and rain to rescue Flops. Eventually, Lutchman’s brother, Rakesh Lutchman, was able to grab her and throw a blanket around her. She was rushed to the Chase Valley Vet for immediate medical attention. Chase Valley Vet’s Dr Estee van Aardt sedated the terrified pooch and removed the container from her head. When The Witness went to visit Flops on Wednesday, the dog was eating and drinking water, and was all round “doing well”. However, she is extremely nervous of humans as she has grown up in the bush. Flops was also sterilised on Wednesday to prevent unwanted puppies being born in the bush every mating season. “She spent four days without food and water. Someone had just dumped the container there, and there is lots of litter around.” She urged people to think about what happens to litter after it’s been discarded on the streets or in the bush. “To the residents of Taj Road, PARR is extremely grateful for your ongoing support and efforts in helping not only Flops but her family as well,” said PARR in a Facebook post. “It is truly heart-warming to see the community come together to help the less fortunate animals.” Lutchman said Flops would be released back with her family once she had recovered but added that if someone was willing to take time and effort to rehabilitate the dog and give her a home, they can e-mail PARR on rescues.pmb@gmail.com