A 14-year-old boy believes he was once given something in his coffee by Darren Goddard that made him sleep and that he was raped that same night. He testified on Tuesday in the Pietermaritzburg high court before Judge Kate Pillay in Goddard’s ongoing trial in which he is charged with rape and sexual assault. The boy said he used to spend weekends at his friend’s house. This friend knew Goddard and both boys would sometimes spend weekends at Goddard’s house. It was not revealed how the friend knew Goddard. One Saturday afternoon, Goddard made the boys coffee. “We drank the coffee and it tasted weird. I think there was something in the coffee. We drank the coffee and felt very sleepy.” Normally, said the boy, when they went to Goddard’s house they would only go to sleep at about 1 or 2 am. He added that while he was sleeping, he felt that there was someone behind him. Half awake, he felt that there was something in his behind. His pants and underpants were pulled down. He noticed Goddard in the room from the corner of his eye. He then pulled up his underpants and pants and fell asleep. That same night he woke up again to find that his underpants and pants were again pulled down and he felt something there. The boy became emotional after telling this to the court. He said that the next morning Goddard looked at him and said that if he told anyone he would kill him. Goddard did not specify what he was talking about. The boy also spoke about how on one occasion he fell asleep on the floor of Goddard’s office. He said he felt movement from behind. He woke up and fell asleep again. When he woke up for the final time there was no one in the office. He said his behind felt sore. He will be cross examined on Wednesday. Earlier, a 13-year-old boy testified. A medical examination reveals that he showed “signs suspicious of sexual assault”. He told the court he was not raped by anyone. However, the state does not allege Goddard raped him but that he sexually assaulted him. Defence advocate Shane Matthews urged him to disclose if someone did “sexual things” to him. Said Matthews: “Do you want to tell us anything?” The boy said no. His testimony is that when he first went to Goddard’s office, he was in Grade 4. “I went to his room. We both would sit down on the bean bags, couch or floor. We would talk about how my day was going … he would come sit next to me and touch my thighs ... “He would rub my private parts and stroke it like a dog. I was too young to know what was happening,” he said. The boy added that before he would leave Goddard’s office, the man would hug him and smack his behind. Questioned by Matthews, the boy, after first denying he ever watched pornography, later conceded he did. The boy said the first time he did, his mother caught him. Matthews’ question arose from a statement his mother made that she found him watching pornography.