A local man has lost all faith in the police after an officer from Alexandra Road police station threatened to shoot him for clicking his tongue. Bongumusa Masepe (26), from Buffer, said the officer manhandled him, threw him out of the police station, swore at him, then threatened to shoot him after accusing him of clicking his tongue at him on Sunday morning. Watch video here: Cop threatens to shoot local man Masepe and his mother went to the police station to report a group of men who had broken into his home on Saturday afternoon and stolen his laptop, cash and cellphones while his mother was home alone. He said he had called the police but they only arrived five hours later and no case was opened. “When we got to the station on Sunday morning the captain in charge said we must wait while he attended people who had arrived after us. He said our case was not as important because it had happened the previous day,” he said. Masepe took out his phone and decided to take a video of the incident as it unfolded. In the video, seen by The Witness, the officer is heard telling Masepe to wait and reprimanding him for clicking his tongue at him. When Masepe questions why they must wait, the officer appears to become enraged and is seen striding towards Masepe, grabbing him and throwing him out of the charge office while shouting in Zulu: “This is not your home. You hear me? Get out, get out, sh*t.” When he sees that Masepe is taking a video he is heard threatening to shoot him. “You’re taking a picture? I will shoot you now because you’re rude.” While saying that, the officer is seen putting his hand towards his back as if trying to draw his service pistol, but returns to the charge office. Masepe said he tried going back into the charge office to lodge a complaint against the officer but he was threatened once again. He said he tried calling the station on Monday but his call was cut as soon as they heard his name. He went to Pietermaritzburg Central police station on Tuesday and was told to report the matter at Alexandra Road police station. When he went back to Alexandra Road he was told to come back today to lodge his complaint as the station commander could only be seen by appointment. “It is really scary to be threatened by the very same people who are supposed to be protecting you ...” he said. The young man said he wanted justice to prevail to prevent what happened to him from happening to someone else. The provincial police media centre was unable to respond to the media inquiry sent to them by the time of going to print on Tuesday.