A young boy on Monday denied that he told anyone that a “coloured” man had abused him. The seven-year-old was testifying in the trial of his guidance counsellor Darren Goddard, who is charged with raping and sexually abusing young boys. He said that it was Goddard — who he referred to as “Mr Doggard” — who did naughty things to him such as playing with his private parts. At the time the child was five years old. He also said that Goddard put “burning grass” in his behind. It was unclear what he meant by this. The boy said it did not feel nice. Under cross-examination by advocate Shane Matthews, the boy said he could not remember a grown coloured man pulling down his pants and abusing him. He was also asked if he told a doctor that the man who counselled him at school told him to close his eyes and then put sand in the boy’s mouth. He also could not remember this. An 11-year-old boy also testified on Monday. He too spoke about being touched inappropriately by Goddard. He said the counsellor used to rub his legs, hug him and kiss him on the forehead. He would also put his hands in the boy’s pants and play with his private parts. The boy said that when he tried to leave, Goddard would pull him and put him on the couch. “He said if I told anyone he would take me away and my family would have to look for me,” said the boy. He also said that Goddard told him he would teach the child how to hurt other children. The boy said that when Goddard touched him, he tried to move his hands but could not because Goddard was too strong. The boy was asked why he told a teacher — whose name he did not know — what Goddard did to him. This was in light of the boy telling the court that he did not tell anyone what Goddard did because of the threat to take him away. Said Matthews: “If you did tell a teacher, then your whole story does not make sense.” The boy said he told the teacher because he wanted to make Goddard stop doing what he was doing. Matthews told the boy he was lying and Goddard had no reason to threaten him about anything. The boy responded: “I was there, I saw what happened to me and I am telling the truth.” He was also asked why he had not told the court that Goddard had put a “slimy thing” in his behind. He said he forgot to tell the court this. Despite Matthews telling him several times that he was not telling the truth and that he was telling lies about Goddard, the boy said he was indeed being truthful. The trial continues.g