A Pietermaritzburg mother is at her wit’s end as her daughter is a month away from writing her final exams and the ID they applied for in January has still not been processed. The mother, who asked not to be named, said she had gone with her daughter, who is in matric at a Pietermaritzburg school, to Home Affairs in New Hanover to apply for the ID document. Pupils may not write their final exams or their Independent Examinations Board exams without an ID document. The woman said her daughter was due to start her exams on October 16. “The school told her she cannot write her exams without it,” said the woman. “I’ve been to Home Affairs so many times.” She said the Home Affairs official who she had been dealing with has told her over and over again that “there is a hold-up at head office”. “He gave me a letter stating that my daughter is eligible for an ID and she will get one ‘when there is no hold-up’.” However, she said the letter was given to her in May this year and no progress has been made since. “I’m at my wit’s end. I have just been told that ‘head office does not function satisfactorily any more’.” She said neither she nor her husband were born in South Africa, however, her husband had been naturalised (the legal process by which a non-citizen in a country may acquire citizenship or nationality of that country) and that she herself held a South African ID. “My daughter was born in South Africa. She has a South African birth certificate and a South African passport. “We first applied for my daughter’s ID on January 5. Three weeks after applying we received notice that the application had been delayed. “Another six weeks went by and we were then told that her application had been cancelled and that she would have to apply again.” The woman said she was pushed from pillar to post and that Home Affairs kept delaying the application and then cancelling it. “I was told first that she must apply for the green ID book and then that was cancelled and they said she should apply for the smart card.” Eventually, the fed-up mother went to the Home Affairs office on Wednesday in Pietermaritzburg. “I was told there was a delay with fingerprints, although my daughter had already been through that process, and that I should try again next week,” she said. The letter the woman received from Home Affairs states that her daughter’s ID application has been delayed and is still being processed. It also states that there are no known reasons why her daughter’s application might be denied or cancelled. National Home Affairs spokesperson Thabo Mokgola did not respond to queries.