Paroled controversial former prison boss and former ANC branch chairperson, Russel Ngubo, spent Wednesday night behind bars. Ngubo is likely to spend another night in jail tonight after he handed himself over to answer on allegations that he had broken his parole conditions. A senior official in the department said Ngubo would only be released after making his case before the parole board. “That can only happen [on Thursday] or on Friday. After that the parole board would be expected to make a decision within 21 days,” said the source. Department of Correctional Services spokeserson Thulani Mdluli said the department would only comment today on the developments. Police and officials from Correctional Services had been looking for Ngubo for more than a week to answer to allegations that he broke his stringent parole conditions. On Tuesday, the ‘hide and seek’ game came to an end when the Pietermaritzburg high court granted an order agreed on by Ngubo’s lawyer and the department, that Ngubo would hand himself over on Wednesday. Ngubo had been released on parole last year after serving 12 years of his 25-year prison term. In 2005 he was convicted of the murder of two IFP members in Impendle in the late 1990s. In terms of Ngubo’s parole conditions, he may not leave Pietermaritzburg without informing officials from the department. However, there are allegations that Ngubo left the province without informing officials to plead for a presidential pardon at the ANC headquarters, Luthuli House. Ngubo has also been accused of disrupting some recent ANC branch general meetings in Impendle that had been called to nominate candidates for leadership positions in the upcoming provincial and regional conference. Ngubo is no stranger to controversy. The 12-year stay in prison of the former deputy director at the Pietermaritzburg prison was dogged by claims that he was given preferential treatment by his former colleagues. Months before his release on parole, Ngubo was accused of attacking a female warder at the Sevontein Correctional Facility. In 2013, Ngubo was transferred to the medium-security Sevontein Prison from Westville Prison amid allegations that he had been terrorising the warders.