Manor Flats residents took to the streets on Monday to protest disconnections carried out by Msunduzi Municipality. Angry residents living in the low-income flats blockaded roads with burning tyres and police had to use stun grenades to disperse the crowd. Although municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the residents’ accounts were in arrears, residents insisted that their accounts were paid up. Rashid Oosman said although his account was up to date, his lights were still disconnected. “This is illegal. I do not know why they are cutting us off because our accounts are paid up. I am on chronic medication and I do not know how am I supposed to store my medication in the fridge without electricity. “There are pensioners living here and they have been cut off. Is the municipality going to compensate us for the food that is in our fridges? Kumaran Moodley, a pensioner, said he had been paying R1 600 every month without any default from 2005. “Yet today I was cut off. I am a pensioner but I always pay. This municipality is playing a dangerous game. I am going to sue them. No matter how much it costs, I will sue them,” he said. Mafumbatha said those residents who say their accounts are up to date must bring proof. A resident who asked not to be named said their electricity was cut off because residents had refused to sign new leases. “Those leases are problematic. It is a one-year lease then after that the lease is renewed on month-to-month basis. That means they can kick us out easily and that is why we refused to sign them. “This is all a plot to get us out of here. They want to bring in new people. They gave title deeds to Copesville residents, why are they not giving them to us? This is abuse. Do they want us to steal?"  Manor Flats resident Rasheed Oosman holds up proof of payment of his water and lights bill after municipal staff cut off electricity to some of the flats POP
unit members arrive to disperse residents of Manor Flats after they blocked
Ohrtmann road with burning tyres and rubble.  