ANC activists marched through Pietermaritzburg to protest against the way in which the seven municipalities in the uMgungundlovu District are being run like a “mafia state”. ANC members of the Moses Mabhida region marched to the provincial legislature on Tuesday to demand the intervention of provincial government because service delivery in the district had collapsed. Wearing ANC T-shirts bearing the face of ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa, they danced and sang their way from Dales Park to town. They threatened to boycott the 2019 elections if corrupt officials and political heads were not axed. “We have come to remind all and sundry that the strategic objectives of our revolution are essentially about the creation of better life for all South Africans, not the enrichment of a small cabal motivated by greed and corruption,” said convener of the aggrieved members, Msawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu. “We are particularly disgusted by how public funds have been embezzled by the uMgungundlovu Municipality and its local municipalities, in particular Msunduzi Local Municipality,” he said. “There are various instances where public money has been squandered by the shady characters within both political and administrative leadership in the Msunduzi Municipality,” said Mchunu, citing: • R15 million that was budgeted for land acquisition for Greater Edendale which remains unaccounted for; • R8 million paid in advance to the contractor, Fairfield Pty Ltd, for Jika Joe temporary housing project, which was never paid back; and • R11 million to pay salaries of workers who are on a protracted “unfair” suspension and have not yet been charged, “which is part of the bullying tactics against workers who dare challenge the dynasty in Msunduzi”. ANC regional executive committee (REC) member Mtuza Mkhize said there would be a boycott of elections if corrupt politicians and officials were not removed from office. “That would be like promoting corruption if we vote,” he said. Mkhize said if Msunduzi Municipality deputy mayor Thobani Zuma and municipal manager Sizwe Hadebe are not fired after the leak of an audio in which Hadebe appears to be rigging an appointment, it would be a sign that the ANC protects corrupt leaders.