The firebombing incident that claimed the lives of five Pietermaritzburg people last week is now believed to have been a murder-suicide. Several separate police sources have said that early indications are that the death of the five was not an arson attack but a murder-suicide, allegedly carried out by Aziz Manjra (46) — father of three and husband to Gori Bee Manjra (46). Manjra, his wife, their two youngest children, Mairoonisa (14) and Muhammad Rizwan (9), and the family’s tenant Zaiboon Valley (50) were found dead inside the family’s Larch Road home near Brookside Mall in the early hours of last Thursday. The Msunduzi fire department had arrived at the double-storey house — purchased by the family just over a week before they died — at around 3.30 am to find the house well alight. Initial reports from police said a charge of arson had been opened and five counts of murder, however, police now believe the tragic incident to have been a murder-suicide. It is alleged that Aziz had assaulted a young woman, however, it is unclear when the assault took place. Relatives of the family, who asked not to be named, said they knew nothing of this assault and had not been informed of police suspicions that the attack was a murder-suicide. Police sources said that following the alleged assault on the young woman, which had not yet been reported to the police, an angry Gori gave Aziz “marching orders” to go back to India — the place he had moved from 25 years ago. Several sources said Aziz had wanted to take the children with him but Gori would not allow it. When Gori would not allow Aziz to take the children with him to India, it is alleged he then set the fire. The details on how this was done are still sketchy. Sources with intimate knowledge of the investigation said when the five bodies were found, Aziz had severe burns to his body and face while the rest of his family and the tenant had suffered minor or no burns. One source said Aziz had been found near the back door of the house with keys in his hand while the body of Muhammad Rizwan was found under a bed. It is believed the cause of death of the other four victims was smoke inhalation. The source also confirmed that traces of accelerants had been found in the house. According to friends and neighbours of the family, Aziz moved from India to South Africa 25 years ago. Together they had shared a small flat with their three children, until they were finally able to buy the Larch Road house, just over a week before the murder-suicide. Gori had worked as a salesperson for Hasmani’s Wholesalers in Church Street while Aziz worked in Janoo’s Wholesalers, also in Church Street. Their oldest daughter had married over the Easter weekend and moved to Johannesburg, while Mairoonisa was a popular Grade 10 pupil at Kharina Secondary School and Muhammad Rizwan a Grade 4 pupil at Shri Vishnu Primary School. A family member told The Witness that Aziz and Gori “did everything together” and had been married for 21 years. “I am not sure how they met but they were very loving towards one another. “Gori was always happy and smiling. At a party, she would be the first to arrive and the last to leave. “Aziz worked almost seven days a week but he still came to family functions. He was well liked. “The family still does not know what happened. We just want closure, we want to get to the bottom of it. “The day before [the incident] Gori was fine, she went to work, she was happy, the children went to school. “We want to know why. Gori was so much fun to be around. You would always find neighbours sitting and chatting to her in her home,” said the family member. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said the police are looking at a number of positive motives and scenarios. “At this early stage of the investigation we are not willing to speculate. We will provide the media with an update once there is a breakthrough,” he said.