A Snathing family feel let down by Msunduzi after their pleas for the City to fix a leaking water pump station, which has turned their home into a swamp, fell on deaf ears. Father-of-five Mbongeni Sithole said his family have not been able to enjoy their seven-bedroom home since the pump was installed next to the road above their house. When The Witness visited the home, he showed puddles in the foyer, kitchen and two bedrooms where the water seems to be seeping from the ground. “For more than three years we’ve been going to the municipality for help but only get a small break after they fix it then it goes back to this after a few months. But now they’ve stopped coming, so since last year it’s been like this,” he said. He said officials that came last year told them they needed to install a drainage system but they never returned to do that. Several trenches have been dug in the yard to drain some of the water away, but Sithole said they are not helping much because place is always wet. Some of the walls have cracks and the family believe it is due to the wetness. The long drop toilet and outside bathroom have also become unusable after the water filled up the pit and compromised the stability of the structure. Last year Msunduzi brought them a mobile toilet and the City’s honeysucker empties it twice a week. An overgrown bush now covers the area that used to have a cattle kraal and a vegetable garden. Sithole’s daughter, Mandisa, said her four-year-old son, Amkele, recently broke his arm when he slipped on one of the puddles in the kitchen. She said she always tries to keep the floors dry by regularly mopping up the water but it is difficult to do it all the time. “My children can’t go to play outside because the whole yard is wet and when they are indoors I have to make sure that they always have their shoes on and watch them so that they don’t go playing in the water,” said Mandisa. She said they stopped trying to replace the furniture when it rotted from the mould and constant wetness because it was becoming a wasteful expenditure since the replacements would start rotting within weeks as well. Msunduzi had not responded to The Witness’ questions at the time of publication.