Two remote-jammers were arrested in the city on Wednesday morning after they were caught in action by Msunduzi Municipality’s Safe City cameras. A cash amount of about R10 000 and a cellphone they allegedly stole were recovered by police. Safe City is a crime prevention initiative that operates 69 CCTV cameras from a control room. Rosalindi Sigaqa, a CCTV operator for Safe City, said at around 10 am on Wednesday morning she detected two remote-jammers along Langalibalele Street near Timber Street. “I noticed two men opening a silver Hyundai. They got in and started searching the car. They took something out of the cubby hole. They then got out of the car, stopped a Quantum taxi driving down Langalibalele and jumped into the taxi.” With the help of her colleagues, Sigaqa followed the taxi (via CCTV) to the New Taxi Rank on Langalibalele Street where it dropped off the two men. She said the police were contacted and notified about the incident. Sigaqa said the men were also captured on their CCTV cameras selling a cellphone, believed to be stolen from the silver Hyundai, to a vendor inside the taxi rank. The police arrested the two suspects at the taxi rank. Meanwhile, the silver Hyundai driver (the victim of the remote jamming incident) was seen getting into his car and driving off. Sigaqa said a short while later the Hyundai driver was involved in a minor accident on Loop Street. When a police officer arrived at the accident scene to tell him about the remote-jamming incident, the driver told the officer that R10 000 cash and a cellphone were missing from his car. Sigaqa said the R10 000 was recovered from one of the suspects along with a car jammer remote when they were arrested. The cellphone was also recovered from the vendor who was also taken in by the police. Sigaqa said she was happy she had played a role in getting the two suspects arrested. “I am very happy that at least I did something today to save someone, it is my job after all,” she said. Safe City general manager Lucas Holtzhausen said they have noticed an increase in remote-jamming incidents in the city lately and cautioned motorists to be wary of such crimes by making sure their car doors are securely locked before walking off. “Remote-jamming is a very difficult crime to detect so I am extremely proud of our operator, the Safe City team and the police for successfully arresting those suspects, especially because they are also believed to be involved in another remote-jamming case in the city,” he said. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said the partnership between the police and Safe City has yielded many arrests in the city. Ngobese cautioned the public against falling victim to remote-jamming and also warned remote-jammers that they will be detected and arrested if they dare try to commit such crime.