Outspoked former Member of Parliament Dr Makhosi Khoza says she will not be returning to the ANC or joining another political party. The former deputy mayor of Pietermaritzburg surprised many when she issued a statement announcing her retirement from politics. Khoza left the ANC last year following a fall-out with some of its senior leaders over what she described as “the lack of decisive action against fraud and corruption”. She founded her own political organisation, the African Democratic Change (ADeC), which she said was founded on the philosophy of Ubuntu and compassion. “I have no regrets about leaving the ANC and I have no intention of going back because honestly, if you look at the current leadership, I will have the same frustrations that made me leave, so why would I want to go back to that,” she said. Khoza told The Witness that she will be joining an organisation whose focus will be holding the local municipalities accountable to the ratepayers. She would not, however, divulge the name of the organisation, just saying that their focus will be ensuring that residents get the service delivery that is due to them. “I’ve always been passionate about local government and even my postgraduate qualifications are on that area, but I’ve never had an opportunity to use them,” Khoza said. “I repeatedly asked the ANC to deploy me to a portfolio that will be linked to local government but I was never given the opportunity.” Khoza holds a doctorate in quality management principles and systems in developmental local governance and previously served as the chief executive officer for the South African Local Government Association. She said there is a lot of injustice that residents suffer at the hands of local government and rooting out of corruption is not prioritised as it is in the national or provincial government. Khoza added that the appalling things that people are forced to learn to accept, including the shameless looting of the municipalities’ coffers, have to be stopped. “When people are being forced to live in a filthy city like in Pietermaritzburg, that is an injustice. “When informal traders who sell at the intersections are not provided with ablution facilities, that is an injustice. “When people don’t have access to clean water, that is an injustice,” she said. Khoza believes she has played her part in the ADeC and that she is not indispensable. She says those who are left behind will be able to take the organisation forward without her at the helm. She also wants to use her time away from politics to push her work in education and the elevation of African languages. She recently published her Zulu language mathematical logic series and dictionary called Uzalo which will be launched next month. “My bigger mission is beyond the confines of politics and political parties so my retirement does not mean that I will stop working. “But I must say that this will also be the first time in a long time that I will be home more often. I’ve missed out a lot when it comes to spending time with my family and fortunately my new responsibilities will allow me to do that,” she said.