It appears the ANC in the province has canned the provincial
conference and all regional conferences scheduled for this month. In a letter leaked to The Witness, provincial interim
committee (PIC) co-ordinator Sihle Zikalala has requested that regions postpone
their conferences indefinitely. “All regions that are due for regional conferences are
requested to postpone their regional conferences until assessment of
preparations towards the regional conferences have been done as per the NEC
[national executive committee] directive,” said Zikalala in the letter
addressed to regional secretaries. “The effect of the above directive inter alia means that,
all regions that had confirmed dates for their regional conferences should be
postponed sine die (indefinitely), and those that were in a process of deciding
on dates for their regional conferences should delay such discussions until
further notice,” said Zikalala. Convenor of the PIC, Mike Mabuyakhulu, was quoted in other
media on Tuesday saying the provincial conference had been postponed. Attempts to get comment from Zikalala and Mabuyakhulu, who
were locked in a meeting last night, were unsuccessful. The build-up to the conference has been marred by
allegations that processes have been manipulated. The ANC in the province is divided between those who support
President Cyril Ramaphosa and those who supported Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s
unsuccessful presidential bid. Meanwhile, concerned ANC branches in the Moses Mabhida
region have called for the national executive committee to intervene after
shots were fired during an ANC regional meeting in Howick on Monday evening. In a statement, the branches called for the intervention “to
prevent bloodshed” in the province. “We are still shocked and saddened by the unprecedented and
foreign behaviour projected by securities and bodyguards of those whom we
regard as our leaders, as they were attacking and shooting members of the ANC
[on Monday], denying them access to a meeting of their own organisation. “We were attacked, harassed and bulldozed for fighting corruption
and against raping of organisational processes towards hosting a regional
conference here in Moses Mabhida Region. “The term of office for the current leadership lapsed [a]
long time ago,” said convenor of the branches, Msawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu. Police spokesperson Thulani Zwane confirmed that a case of
unlawful discharge of a firearm opened at Howick police station was under
investigation. Mchunu said they would continue with their fight to oust
regional leaders. “We say their time is over now, they failed to lead us at
all levels. Municipalities obtained disclaimers under their leadership, killing
of comrades increased under their leadership, the city of Pietermaritzburg is
deteriorating daily under their leadership, big business[es] have shut down
their restaurants and shops in the city under their leadership. “We will continue to fight for what is right, which is pure
basic service delivery in the main,” he said. 