Two of the 16 prisoners who escaped from the Sun City prison in Johannesburg on Monday were shot and killed during an exchange of gunfire with police near Greytown on Tuesday night. The 16 prisoners escaped the Medium A Johannesburg Correctional Centre in the early hours of Monday morning, and have been on the run from law enforcement since then. The prisoners, seven of whom were awaiting trial for murder, with another three arrested for rape, escaped the prison through a pipe shaft. They then used an object to break through the prison wall and were able to get past the prison’s fences. Mountain Rise police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said on Thursday that the organised crime unit as well as the provincial tracing unit and the Durban K9 team had received information that two of the 16 prisoners were travelling from Msinga (near Tugela Ferry) to Cramond. KwaZulu-Natal Hawks spokesperson Captain Simphiwe Mhlongo said that police spotted their vehicle on the R33 near Greytown. Mhlongo said the men began firing at police, however, police retaliated in self-defence and both men were killed. Mhlongo said a 9mm pistol and a toy gun were found on the men. It is believed that the 9mm pistol had the serial number scratched off. Although it appears one of the men has been identified through multiple social media groups, police said their identities could not be revealed as their families had not formally identified the bodies. Ebrahim said it is not known where the 14 other escapees are, but said visible policing and patrolling had been increased in the area. Correctional Services spokesperson Logan Maistry told News24 that the department was working “around the clock” with police to ensure the remaining escapees were arrested. He said the department had information that it was working on, but could not reveal anything in case it hampered the investigation. “We are appealing to the public not to approach them [the escapees] but to report [their sighting] to the nearest police station.” The charges against the 16 escapees range between murder, rape, robbery, house breaking and armed robbery.