Mystery surrounds the disappearance of a Sweetwaters man who has been missing for over a week, after his car was last traced driving along the M13 near Kloof. Nkosingiphile Sithole, an accountant at MSC Cruises in Durban, was last seen on April 16 after leaving home to go to work as usual. He was expected to return home later that day but he didn’t. Sithole did not report for duty either and no one has heard from him since. His girlfriend, Ningi Mbanjwa, told The Witness on Tuesday that each day her partner continues to be missing is torture to her. “This is killing me but sometimes I have to show that I am strong and face this, but I can’t handle it,” she said with tears in her eyes. When Mbanjwa failed to communicate with anyone after leaving for work on Monday, Mbanjwa said she called him later that day and someone else answered his cellphone. “He usually sends a message or phones when he arrives home from work but that day he didn’t. I called him around 10 pm and someone else answered his phone. The person said he was still driving, he will get back to me, and then he cut the call,” Mbanjwa said. “I thought it was one of his friends or a colleague. I waited for him to get back to me but he didn’t.” The following morning, Mbanjwa sent Sithole numerous messages checking if he was okay. He did not respond. She said that at one point she thought that her partner could be out with his friends and would be home soon. However, she was alarmed when she received a call from Sithole’s younger brother telling her that he had not arrived home and no one could reach him on his cellphone. They reported him missing at the Pietermaritzburg police station. The family also put his picture on social media, urging those who might have seen him to contact the police. But the family have been left confused and heartbroken and want him to return home safely. “He would never miss work without a substantial reason and he has never disappeared without a trace. Nkosi’s phone is never switched off,” added Mbanjwa. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Captain Khosi Khonjelwayo said they were still investigating the matter.