Former Sharks stars Mark Andrews and Joel Stransky have
called on the side’s coaching staff and players to carry out serious
introspection following their disappointing start to the Super Rugby season. The Sharks are halfway through the campaign and find themselves
in the wrong half of the log table after five defeats, two wins and a draw in
their eight matches to date. Andrews and Stransky fear that if the situation doesn’t
change soon, the Sharks may not make the quarter-finals of the tournament and
their loyal fans would be hugely disappointed. Andrews, who turned out as lock or No. 8 for the Sharks
during his heyday, said on Monday he had expected way better from the current
crop in Durban. “My expectations were that they were going to play a lot
better and be a lot more consistent this season because of the pack they
currently have,” he explained. “I think they have got a great coaching staff and great
leadership under Gary Teichmann as the CEO, they have got good structures in
place. They seem to have all the endurance, they have the experience in players
such as the Beast [Tendai Mtawarira] and have some great talent coming through
the youngsters, especially in the backline. “So, by all means, the Sharks should be really disappointed
by their inconsistency. I mean, how do they lose with dignity to big sides,
beat some fairly strong sides and then go down with 40 points at home to the
Bulls? “Even if you go down, go down with respect — at least with a
seven-point difference, I didn’t expect them to go down with 40 points.” He said the main issue at the moment was inconsistent
performances by the team, which “the players and the coaches have to ask
themselves about”. Stransky, a famous son of the Maritzburg rugby soil and a
former flyhalf, also said there’s a need for Shark coach Robert du Preez and
his men to dig deep to find a way out of their troubles. “What stands out for me is the lack of consistency. They
have played very well at times, like when they smoked the Blues and lost to the
Hurricanes in a game that they probably should have won, but then to come home
and be that poor against the Bulls! To lose by 40 points at home is not on,”
said Stransky, who works as a TV commentator. “I don’t know what the cause of that is, because if you
look, there is talent in that team. “At times they play a great brand of rugby, really wonderful
rugby, but you have to be consistent. Right now, they are not.” The Maritzburg College old boy said the Sharks had a similar
problem to their next opponents, the Stormers, and he challenged coach Du Preez
to work as smart as he could. “At times you got to think a little bit differently, think
out of the box as a coach. You’ve got to be more proactive and I think at times
both those teams are very predictable,” he said. “Teams that are smart — John Mitchell [Bulls] is undoubtedly
one of the smarter coaches around, if not the smartest — are able to analyse
well and get their players to deliver, find the way to overcome the teams and
find the way to win. From the Sharks’ perspective, it’s really disappointing.” The Sharks play the Stormers at King’s Park on Saturday at
5.15 pm.