Pietermaritzburg is set to become a Unesco City of Music. Drakensberg Boys’ Choir School founder, John Tungay, said the capital is a treasure house of music that regularly sends performers to sing overseas. Its choirs frequently return home with gold medals. He said that by becoming a Unesco City of Music, Maritzburg will be opening up local music for the entire world to enjoy. He added: “One of the reasons why we put this together is the scarcity of jobs in the city. Through this we want to encourage more young people to become artists. “Msunduzi as a city possesses one of the finest pipe organs in Africa which is essential to accompany many works of the old masters; and has its own orchestra.” Tungay added that Pietermaritzburg has decades of experience in successfully organising and hosting international events like the Comrades Marathon and the Midmar Mile, the world’s largest open-water swimming event. “The city has sufficient experience to organise international festivals of organ and orchestral music, choral festivals, as well as jazz and other styles of popular modern music.” The Unesco Creative Cities Network is a world organisation that strives to promote cooperation with and among cities that have identified creativity as a strategic factor for sustainable urban development. Among those who will be patrons of the city are the mayor of Msunduzi Themba Njilo, head of the music department at the University of KwaZulu-Natal Professor Chats Jugroop, expert on construction of ancient African musical instruments Tandile Mandela, and the director of Arts and Culture in KZN, Dr Raj Govender. As part of his plans to promote the city and the Unesco project, the mayor will be hosting Music Magnificent in the Pietermaritzburg City Hall from 6 pm tomorrow. Performing a range of choral music will be the Laddsworth Primary School Choir, the senior choir of Epworth Prep School, organist Hennie Nolte, the choir of Gert Maritz Primary School, the Pietermaritzburg Children’s Choir, the choir of Carter High School, the Msunduzi Chorale, and the Drakondale Girls Choir. Tickets are R50. Get yours at Marshall Music at Cascades and Allisons Saddlery at the corner of Boshoff Street and Victoria Road.