An Imbali family have been feeling like prisoners in their own home after a reign of terror by two stray dogs that moved into their backyard. Mvanga Mncube said his family have been living at the mercy of these “vicious” dogs for the past four months and he was “relieved and overjoyed” when the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty against Animals (SPCA) finally removed one of the dogs from his property on Tuesday. Mncube said the family initially had one male dog but at the beginning of the year, two Africanis breed dogs came to live on his property. “We tried chasing them out of our yard but they were stubborn. We didn’t feed them but they bullied our dog for food. I fenced my property properly and tried using an old door and concrete bricks to close the space under the gate but they find a way in. Sometimes they even wait outside the gate and when you drive out they walk back in. It has been frustrating.” Mncube said when the female dog arrived, she was pregnant and gave birth to 12 puppies in his yard. He said that in addition to the dog he already owned, there were now “too many dogs for us to handle”. “The noise was unbearable, so people started coming to ask for the puppies and we gave them away and decided to keep one for ourselves.” Mncube said when the stray female dog is on heat, more unknown dogs come onto their property to mate with her, forcing his entire family to stay indoors. “These dogs also chase children on the street and people think it’s our dogs. I fear that one day they are going to attack someone and the community will blame it on me. These dogs also may have rabies so I am also scared of them.” Mncube said he had reported the matter to the SPCA on several occasions.  Mvanga Mncube describes the his efforts to keep the dogs out of his yard. “The SPCA told me that I need to catch the dogs or make sure they are in our yard when they come through, but the problem is I am also scared to go anywhere near them.” The SPCA on Tuesday visited Mncube’s home and one of the two dogs was removed from his property. The other dog managed to flee and attempts by the SPCA field offers to capture the dog failed. Ronnie Yeoman, SPCA’s spokesperson, said because the SPCA covers a huge area and does not have enough manpower to spend the day trying to catch dogs, they normally ask people to confine stray dogs on their property until the SPCA arrives. “It’s not us being difficult but more often than not, by the time we get there the animal has run away or cannot be found. Unfortunately we do not have enough people to be running around looking for one dog when we’ve got cruelty complaints to attend to,” she said.