Frustrated students at the Indumiso campus of the Durban
University of Technology blocked the entrance to the campus on Tuesday
following an ongoing dispute about student allowances. The students, who started protesting early on Tuesday at the
main entrance of the campus, said that the 
“the poorest of the poor” of them have been left to “suffer”. A single police car monitored the peaceful protesters
dancing and singing in a circle, from the opposite side of the road, while a
private security company stood to the side, keeping an eye on the students. DUT SRC deputy president Siphiwe Vilakazi said they had been
in discussions with the institution since February about raising allowances for
National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) students. He said students were getting R1 000 a month for food and
R2 000 for text books. “We met with NSFAS and asked why our allowances have not
increased like they have at other institutions 
and we were told by them to address with DUT,” said Vilakazi. He said there were meetings with the finance office and the
dean of students in February, where both parties allegedly agreed on R1 600 a
month for food and R7 000 for textbooks. “They told us in February we would receive the increase in
March. In March, they told us the increase would come in April, but this month
came and there was still no increase. “Students have to attend classes and write tests hungry and
female students are missing classes because they are unable to buy sanitary
pads. “We cannot allow this to continue. We cannot allow our
students to go hungry,” he said. First year student and NSFAS beneficiary Njabulo Kalushi
Ntshoba said he was supposed to receive accommodation, meal and textbook
allowances, but had received nothing. “It is going to be a struggle to get through the year. I
still have no accommodation. I am squatting. “We are told we need to complete our qualifications so we
can go out into the world and uplift our society, but how can we when this is
happening?” DUT spokesperson Nduduzo Ndlovu said the university “is
concerned about the student protests that took place ... in Durban and [at] the
Midlands campuses”. “Students were protesting to voice their unhappiness, as
some have not received their NSFAS allowances for meals and books. “There was reported damage to university property caused by
the protesting students. “Four students sustained injuries during an altercation
between students and police and the injured students were transported to
hospital to receive medical attention,” said Ndlovu. “DUT has met with the SRC and a team from NSFAS has been
working closely with the university to resolve issues related to the NSFAS
allowances. “Progress has been made over the last two weeks and we are
confident that all NSFAS allowances will be distributed to all qualifying
students at DUT. “DUT sincerely apologises to the staff and students who were
affected by the disruptions,” said Ndlovu. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi
Ngobese said that the protest had been non-violent, police were monitoring and
the situation was under control. 