A Barrage of adverts
posted on social media about a dietary supplement that promises a “funeral for
your fat” has raised alarms over the availability of diet pills — with many
people unaware of the related risks and side effects. Medical practitioners
are warning consumers against the use of a popular weight-loss product “The
Secret Fat Burner”, which has landed a number of people in hospital. The Society for
Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes of South Africa (Semdsa) last month sent
a letter to the South African Product Regulatory Authority (Sahpra), asking
them to attend to this issue urgently. Semdsa chairperson
Nazeer Mohamed told Weekend Witness
there are potentially life-threatening complications that may arise as a result
of using this product. “Patients who use
this product presented with features of an overactive thyroid. Other features
of an overactive thyroid include palpitations, anxiety, heat tolerance,
aggravation of hypertension,” said Mohamed. He said use of the product
also presented cardiac complications such as rapid heart rate and — scariest of
all — cardiac failure. “We strongly advise
healthcare professionals [to acquire] the knowledge to warn, advise and treat
patients that may have used the product, since it has been freely advertised on
social media,” added Mohamed. The product contains
mostly plant extracts. Bitter orange extract, chromium (trace mineral) and
yohimbine (derived from the bark of a tree with the same name in central and
western Africa), are a few examples. There are several
warnings on the company’s Facebook page warning members of the public about a
fake version of their product. The fat burner supplement is not available in
pharmacies or shops. It has to be acquired through an agent. According to a
statement on the company’s Facebook page, it has submitted samples of the
product to the Department of Health officials. “The products were
submitted together with our own independent test certificates, clearly proving
that our products do not contain any illegal substances,” read the statement. Efforts to get
comment from The Secret Fatburner SA head office have been unsuccessful. According to The
Secret product packaging, side effects include a slight headache, insomnia, a
coated, pasty tongue and irritability. Durban resident
Courtney van Schalkwyk alleged that she fell victim to the side effects of the
product after using it in November 2016. Van Schalkwyk told Weekend Witness that she had been
introduced to the product after a family member used it and had great success
with it. “I started having
side effects 10 days after taking the product. I had very bad upper abdominal
pain.” After consulting with
a doctor, Van Schalkwyk said she thought it was an ulcer. “I informed my doctor
that I was using this product. Although he hadn’t heard of the product he
advised me to stop taking it. He prescribed medication for an ulcer — the pain
went away.” Against her doctor’s
advice, she continued to use the product because she had already seen instant
weight loss results. A month later, Van
Schalkwyk said the same pain returned and it was discovered she had three blood
clots, which she believes formed after she used the product. “I had one clot in my
main portal vein, one in my splenic vein and one in the vein that supplies
blood to my small intestine. The clots were so severe that they had stopped
blood flow to vital organs.” Van Schalkwyk
underwent surgery and had to be placed on a ventilator for five days. “I’m on blood
thinners for life, which means I inject myself in the stomach every day to
prevent my blood from re-clotting. I never expected something like that to
happen from a fat burner, especially one that claimed to be natural. It changed
my life forever.” Anche Dauth from
Howick said she had also suffered terrible side effects when she started using
the product in January. “I suffered from
terrible headaches and nausea. I was not happy with the results. I think I only
lost one kilogram and I never carried on with it because I thought it was just
a waste of time.” Another woman from
Pietermaritzburg who started using the product in December 2016 said she had
experienced severe headaches and extensive hair loss. “My friend had worse
side effects, and since then she has had treatment for thyroid issues and BP
[blood pressure],” said the woman who declined to be named. She said although she
had lost 13 kg while on the product, after she stopped taking the pills she
piled on the weight again. Dietitian Jessica
Potgieter, said the temptation to lose weight easily and quickly is hard to
resist but agreed that most of these products have proven to be ineffective. “There is not enough
research done to confirm the safety and efficacy of these drugs. They are also
not endorsed by any medical backing,” said Potgieter. For weight loss,
Potgieter advised a lifestyle change “Unfortunately, the
pill will not be a ‘magic trick’ that fixes everything,” she explained. While at least three
people told Weekend Witness they had purchased The Secret at a pharmacy in
Pietermaritzburg, the pharmacy denied ever selling the product.