The worst fears of a Northdale woman’s family came true on Sunday morning when a police constable she had a history of harassment with allegedly shot her dead. The body of Wendy Dlamini (29) was found by family members about a kilometre from the home she grew up in on Larkspur Road, after the alleged killer, whom she had known for many years, sent a message via a mutual acquaintance to “go and pick up her body”. The constable, who lives in Mpolweni, handed himself over at the New Hanover police station after the incident. He will appear at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court this week. Distraught family members converged on Admiral Road, Northdale, for hours on Sunday morning, where the constable had allegedly driven her before shooting her three times and leaving her body. Dlamini worked for the Department of Environmental Affairs and was based in Eshowe, but she visited Pietermaritzburg most weekends. Dlamini’s brother, Eugene (26), told The Witness he woke up on Sunday morning to find her walking out of the house because she wanted to speak to the constable, with whom she had a fractious relationship. “He had visited and she said she wanted to just speak to him and I thought they were going to speak outside so I went to bath. Then not long after that I got a call from someone telling me [the constable] told him to tell me to go pick up her body on Admiral Road.” Eugene said he took a taxi to the nearby road and found Dlamini’s body at the end of the road, which is surrounded by dense bush. A shaken Eugene said: “She was wearing a gown which had draped over her face. I took it off and saw a bullet wound on her back and one in her head. I took her pulse, it was faint. I called the police and ambulance.” Dlamini’s family claimed she had taken out a protection order against the man last year. They said Dlamini had known the constable from school days. Her aunt, Thandiwe Bhengu, said: “We used to tell her to stay away from him otherwise something like this would happen, and look, it did happen.” Dlamini was described as a bubbly and friendly person. “She was going to get a transfer to work in Pietermaritzburg soon, and she was excited to be closer to her family. She had also got a raise at work and was thinking of buying a car,” Bhengu said. She was the mother of two sons, aged 10 and four, and a 10-month-old daughter.