A Mpumalanga Taxi Association member was shot and killed in his bakkie early on Monday morning on the N3, close to the Hammarsdale off-ramp. Police confirmed that Mthethomusha Ngubane (38) had died in the incident. He suffered fatal gunshot wounds to the upper abdomen and ER24 paramedics reported that he had been shot in the head. Traffic on the N3 to Pietermaritzburg was delayed during the morning as police and traffic officers inspected Ngubane’s body, slumped over onto the steering wheel of his bakkie. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said a case of murder had been opened at the Hammarsdale police station. She said the motive of the killing was unknown and investigations were ongoing. Ngubane’s death follows a number of killings that plagued the taxi industry last year. In late December two taxi bosses were gunned down within a 24-hour period. Mpumalanga Taxi Association chairperson Mbhekeni Hlophe (64) died in a hail of bullets when his vehicle was ambushed in Sweetwaters on Christmas morning. The gunmen fired some 31 shots into his car. On Christmas Eve, 80-year-old KwaMnyandu Taxi Association chairperson Mzameni Mthiyane was shot and killed at his home in Umlazi. In July, 66-year-old taxi operator Sibusiso Obed Nkomonde from Newcastle, who chaired the Sizwe Taxi Owners Association, was shot dead. In another incident in July, an eight-year-old child and her mother died after they were hit by a vehicle as the driver dodged gunmen on the N3. In late October a “well-planned hit” on a Klipriver taxi boss left 10 people dead near Ladysmith. The KZN chairperson of Santaco (South African National Taxi Association), Boy Zondi, said yesterday the killing of Ngubane was a sad day for the taxi industry. “We send our condolences to the family of the deceased,” he said. Zondi emphasised that if there were issues between people within the taxi association, they should find a solution in the “boardroom like businessmen”. “We must stop killing each other and start talking,” said Zondi.