KZN ANC members who support Cyril Ramaphosa have rejected the newly formed provincial interim structure. Disgruntled members picketed outside the ANC provincial offices in Durban on Monday to express their deep dissatisfaction with the composition of the interim structure. They claimed the structure formed after the suspension of the provincial executive committee (PEC), is dominated by those who support former provincial chairperson Sihle Zikalala, who is the co-ordinator of the new interim structure. Out of the 16 members of the structure tasked with preparing for a fresh provincial conference within three months, 10 were members of the suspended PEC that supported Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s unsuccessful ANC presidential bid. The picketers on Monday hurled insults at President Jacob Zuma as well as ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule, whom they accused of being biased towards the suspended PEC. They also sang songs in support of Ramaphosa and former provincial chairperson Senzo Mchunu, who was ousted in the 2015 provincial conference, the results of which have since been nullified by a decision of a Pietermaritzburg high court. While demanding a 50/50 representation in the structure, eThekwini councillor Sthenjwa Nyawose said the disgruntled members did not recognise the current interim structure. ‘Wounds in KZN ANC to deep too heal in three months’ Nyawose, who led the first march in 2015 to the ANC provincial offices to complain about the results of the conference, told the crowd that the new structure was not inclusive. Leader of the picket, Mthunzi Dlamini, said the picket was not directed at the provincial interim structure, but at the ANC national working committee (NWC) which met on Monday, and the national executive committee (NEC). “I cannot dwell much on the composition of the interim structure because the NWC is dealing with that and it will be wrong to say something before they come back to us,” he said. Dlamini said the three-month deadline given by the ANC NEC for the province to convene a fresh conference was insufficient. “Understanding deep divisions in the province, three months would not be enough for us to heal those wounds caused by divisions,” he said. Dlamini said the interim structure also needed more time to deal with membership. “Membership should be open to everyone. Those who have been removed from membership roll should be included and be allowed to participate in the ANC processes,” he said. The group leaders met with Zikalala and convener of the interim structure, Mike Mabuyakhulu, behind closed doors while disgruntled members continued to picket outside ANC provincial offices. Zikalala said the new structure was committed to bringing unity and making sure that no ANC member in the province was denied their right to participate in party processes. “Their concern is that KZN has been going through difficulties and divisions and they don’t believe that we will be able to convene a re-run conference within the set time frame. “We will be meeting these comrades next week and we want to try and get one or two members of the NEC to do this with us. We believe that the issues they have raised should be passed on to the NEC,” he said. Mabuyakhulu was tough on those wearing CR17 regalia, the campaign slogan for Ramaphosa’s ANC presidential campaign. “It is a given that we have only one president of the ANC and that most of the songs will be pro-ANC and pro-ANC president. But we must never factionalise the president of the ANC. “He is not owned by a particular faction. He is owned by all the members of the ANC and belongs to the ANC as a whole. He is the ANC president not the president of the few,” he said.