In their attempt to avoid relegation this season, National
First Division club Royal Eagles have strengthened the squad with three new
players while terminating the contract of their Cameroonian goalkeeper Joslain
Mayebi. The local side’s general manager, James Dlamini, confirmed on
Monday they have ended their relationship with Mayebi because of poor
performances. “We have parted ways with Joslain. We felt he was not doing
enough as an international goalkeeper. He conceded soft goals regularly. “Things just didn’t work out with him. So, we mutually
agreed that it was best for the club to let him go, and we wish him all the
best in his future,” he said. Mayebi (31) joined Eagles in July 2016 and conceded 23 goals
in 15 league appearances this season. The Pietermaritzburg-based side suffered a 4-3 home defeat
to Mbombela United at the weekend, which left them two points above the
relegation zone after 16 matches. Mayebi will be replaced by a fellow countryman Patrick
Nyame, who joins from Angolan club Progresso do Sambizanga. Nyame was the national team’s first-choice goalkeeper during
the 2016 African Nations Championship held in Rwanda. The 31-year-old ‘keeper has also previously been on the
books of Les Astres in Cameroon, among other clubs in his career. In confirming his capture, Eagles said: “We have signed
another Cameroonian goalkeeper, Patrick Nyame. The deal is signed and sealed.
But, unfortunately he could not get his international clearance in time and
that’s why he was not playing against Mbombela. But he’s got his work permit
and everything else and hopefully everything will be sorted out so he can
travel with the team to Mthatha.” The match against Mthatha Bucks takes place on Saturday. Another goalkeeper who has joined the club is Msawakhe
Mncwango from Durban FC, and according to Dlamini, the youngster will add
competition in their goalkeeping department that also includes Bafana Nhlapho,
who was between the sticks last weekend. At this point, Nhlapho’s future at the club hangs in the
balance. “We’ve also signed a very good under-23 keeper, Msawakhe
Mncwango. He’s a quality goalkeeper and will add competition in that
department. We hope to add one more before the end of January. We will see what
happens with Nhlapho because he is a leader but unfortunately age is catching
up with him.” The well-funded, but under-performing franchise have been
busy in this transfer window, having also added Cape Town defender Bayzel
Goldstone in a team that also features returnee Masibusane Zongo. Dlamini added: “We have also signed Bayzel because as much
as we are scoring goals, we are also conceding a lot. So, we will continue to
beef up our team in the next few weeks. Currently we have two strikers at the
club but unfortunately one of them has picked up an injury. Hopefully he’ll
recover in a week’s time and we can finalise the deal.”