A total of 48 houses were built by the government in Copesville as part of the Operation Sukuma Sakhe Emergency Housing project.  This should have resulted in a happy ending for people in desperate need of housing, but it hasn’t turned out that way.  Residents said indigent people in the community who were profiled and registered for housing allocations in 2016, but a new list instead contained names of people unknown to the community. “There are people whose applications had been approved in 2016 who are still waiting to move into houses. People are occupying the houses while the official beneficiaries are struggling to find accommodation,” said a resident. Regina Hadebe (79) who has been renting a dilapidated shack in Honeyville for 25 years, believes she was “conned” out of the home she was allocated. After being profiled by community caregivers Hadebe’s name was placed on the list as an urgent beneficiary. “I am now giving up hope of getting a house. I’ve been registering my name in the hope of getting a house but I’m still waiting,” said Hadebe. Hadebe, who is partially blind, said the shack she rents has been burgled many times. During the break-ins she has had social grant money and other goods stolen. “I live in fear. The drug addicts break into my house and sometimes even steal furniture. They take advantage of me because I can’t see clearly,” she said. A caregiver in the area, who did not want to be named for fear of being victimised, confirmed that Hadebe was one of the first people she profiled. “She was supposed to be a priority. Gogo’s case was very serious and we put her name up as one of the people who should get a house immediately.  “It is really sad that she still doesn’t have a house.” Residents claimed that some of the people currently occupying the RDP houses were not from the area, but had mysteriously managed to get houses. Outraged resident in Ward 29 lashed out at local councillor Sphamandla Madlala and the housing allocation process. But he responded: “I was not part of the people who compiled the lists. I’m just a ward councillor. Community caregivers, the ward committee and a private investigator from the department of Human Settlements compiled the lists,” said Madlala. He was aware of gogo Hadebe’s plight: “We are doing everything we can to assist her. There are people who were left out from the old list who will be given houses soon,” he said.