It was a special delivery in Northdale on Sunday morning when a baby girl was delivered by an off-duty nurse on the side of the road. A nurse, who was busy cleaning in her house on Sunday morning, had no choice but to help a woman deliver her child on the side of Knoll Place Road, after the pregnant woman had waited for over an hour for the ambulance. Razheeza Khan said her 12-year-old son told her that there was a pregnant woman who needed help down the road. “People were looking at her from a distance and no one was coming to help. “Another woman came running and said ‘please can you help’. When I got there I found she was in labour. I tried to calm her and told her not to push, but she eventually started delivering.” Khan said she had no gloves or anything sterile to use, so she asked someone get her a plastic bag to use as gloves, and a peg to clamp the umbilical cord. “I delivered the child, clamped the umbilical cord and then asked her to push for the after-birth.  “It all happened on the side of the road ... we tried to cover her up,” she said. Khan said the entire ordeal lasted for about half an hour, with the ambulance arriving a short while after she had delivered.  The new mother and the baby were taken to hospital and Khan went back home to take a bath, feeling very pleased with herself. “This was the first time I have ever delivered a baby by myself. My children are pleased with me and I am also very happy with myself,” she said. The baby’s mother, Ntombenhle Mbambo (29), who stays at Nkululeko informal settlement which is across the road from Khan’s house, said she had been waiting for the ambulance for over an hour. “I am grateful for what Razheeza did. She saved our lives and if it weren’t for her we’d be telling a different story,” she said. Mbambo gave birth to a healthy baby girl, Azande, and said the nurses at Northdale Hospital had complimented how Khan had done a stunning job when delivering the baby. “They wanted to call her and compliment the great job she did but unfortunately I didn’t have her number. There were no complications and Azande is doing just fine,” she said. The baby’s father, Bayanda Gumede, also thanked Khan for helping deliver his baby girl.