“I thought they were going to kidnap me. I thought this was it.” These were the words of a traumatised Pietermaritzburg woman who was confronted by two men while walking along Clarke Street in Pelham in broad daylight. One of them sexually molested her and she said they had tried to force her into their car. The distraught woman, who asked that her name not be published, told The Witness  she was walking home from a nearby shop on Monday morning when two men in a Toyota single cab pulled up next to her. “One of the men got out of the car and grabbed my arm,” said the woman who broke down in tears when speaking to The Witness. She said the man held her and would not let go despite her pleas. She said the man began to touch her inappropriately, while still holding onto her arm, refusing to let go. “He kept saying he was going to Durban and wanted a woman to have a good time with,” she said. “He also kept offering me drugs and all I wanted to do was just get away. “I thought they were going to kidnap me and this was it. I was terrified. “You read about these things but I never expected it to happen [to me]. And it was in broad daylight. “The other man with him then got out of the car and said something in Zulu to him. “I managed to get away but I couldn’t run, it was all so horrible,” she said, still crying. “I felt helpless. I was not wearing any make-up or jewellery or a dress. I was wearing a scarf, jeans and a long-sleeve top. “I could not believe what had happened.” She said she walked until she heard their van start up before turning around. She took down the number plate and posted it on her local WhatsApp security group. “It was all I could think of to do,” she said. The woman said soon after she posted the information her brother spotted the vehicle parked outside a house in Oribi. While the community guarded the van, ensuring that the two men did not escape, the police were called and the alleged assailants were arrested. “The police, the WhatsApp group, everyone was just so wonderful,” said the woman. The woman warned others to be aware of their surroundings at all times and added that she would not be able to walk to the shops for a while following the attack. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said two men between the ages of 30 and 40 were arrested and charged with sexual assault. He said the men were also found to be in possession of drugs and would appear in court soon. Ngobese said the quick arrest was due to the partnership between the community and law enforcement and encouraged communities to keep working with police in the fight against crime.