Former policeman-turned-rogue Brian Treasurer, who was serving a life sentence for his role in killing local doctor Bhavish Sewram, has died. The notorious 57-year-old died on Saturday at King Edward Hospital. Department of Correctional Services spokesperson Thulani Mdluli said on on Sunday that the cause of death was “natural”. “He was a known hypertension patient and also had a stroke before admission to our centre,” he said. Mdluli added that Treasurer’s family members were informed of his death and “we are busy with administration regarding the death and funeral arrangements to assist the family”. At the time of his sentence in September 2015, Treasurer told the court he had been medically boarded by the police service. Treasurer, along with his partner in crime Mfaniseni Nxumalo, were given life sentences for murdering Sewram at his surgery in June 2013. The alleged mastermind behind the murder, businessman Rajivee Soni, is still currently on trial for the murder. He has pleaded not guilty and denied any involvement in Sewram’s death. Soni will return to the dock in February this year when the state and defence are expected to argue whether or not he is guilty. At his trial, Treasurer had pleaded not guilty. But Sabelo Dlamini, the gunman who admitted having fired the fatal shots that killed Sewram on May 13, 2013, said Treasurer had transported him and his accomplice, Nxumalo, to and from the murder scene and handed him a cocked firearm with which to shoot the doctor. Dlamini also testified that after the shooting, Treasurer had made a cellphone call to someone and told them “the job is done”. Treasurer had left him and Nxumalo at Masons informal settlement, to return a short while later and hand over R12 000 for the killing. Judge Anton van Zyl said when sentencing Treasurer and Nxumalo, thaty Treasurer drove Dlamini and Nxumalo close to the doctor’s surgery. Dlamini was shown where to wait until the lights of Sewram’s surgery were switched off, then to go to his car and shoot him. The case attracted widespread publicity. The state alleged in its indictment that the murder was planned by Soni, who in turn hired Treasurer, Nxumalo and Dlamini to carry it out. Soni’s alleged motive for wanting the doctor dead was his alleged affair with Soni’s wife, Kerusha.