The ANC national leadership has resolved that the KwaZulu-Natal provincial executive committee (PEC) should be disbanded. Sources at the ANC’s Luthuli House headquarters in Johannesburg said the KwaZulu-Natal top brass and provincial chairperson Sihle Zikalala were informed about the decision at a meeting on Monday. “They were told that they will have to vacate office as part of the ANC’s drive to unify the party. It appears [that] the provincial leadership had prepared itself for the bad news as it never raised any objections during the meeting,” a source in Luthuli House said. The meeting took place at Luthuli House. The decision follows divisive squabbles between the PEC and former premier Senzo Mchunu’s supporters. Mchunu’s supporters subsequently won a legal battle between the two factions when Pietermaritzburg high court judges ruled that the PEC’s election was illegitimate. The PEC had, however, returned to office after filing a notice to appeal the judgment. “While the national leadership fully supports the PEC’s decision to appeal the court judgment, it could not turn a blind eye to the divisions caused by perceptions that the current provincial leadership was not properly elected,” said a source. He added that the decision to go to court took place because “grievances had been ignored”. “The [ANC’s] top six leadership felt it had a duty to correct the mistakes that were committed by the previous national leadership,” the source said. The latest decision is subject to ratification by the ANC national executive committee (NEC), which is due to hold a meeting on Thursday. “There is no doubt that NEC members will support the decision ... and allow a provincial task team (PTT) to be appointed to run the affairs of the province and prepare for a provincial conference,” another source said. ANC KwaZulu-Natal provincial secretary Super Zuma declined to confirm the national leadership’s decision on the PEC but confirmed that a meeting had taken place. “The meeting did take place, but I think you should contact the ANC secretary-general for the full details,” he said. Secretary-general Ace Magashule could not be reached for comment. The party’s national communication manager, Khusela Diko, said the organisation would not disclose the outcome of the meeting between the PEC and the national officials as it was an “internal
matter”. However, several PEC members who spoke to The Witness on
condition of anonymity welcomed the national officials’ decision. “We are ready for another provincial elective conference
where we will prove that comrade Sihle and the entire PEC were overwhelmingly
elected by branches. “We know that Senzo Mchunu will no longer be able to contest
as he is now at national, but his people are free to nominate anyone in their
camp to challenge Sihle, who we are 100% certain will be elected chairperson
again,” a PEC member said. A prominent member of the ANC in KZN who campaigned for
Cyril Ramaphosa in the build-up to last month’s party conference, said there
were plans to nominate former economic development MEC Mike Mabuyakhulu to
contest the position of provincial chairperson. “Mabuyakhulu is a highly-respected leader in the province
with a distinguished career in government. He is a principled leader who,
during the many years he had spent as an MEC, has never been accused of
corruption,” the ANC member said.