Controversial midfielder Masibusane Zongo has been
given a chance to revive his ailing football career at local club Royal Eagles
after being out of the game for a while. The skilful but poorly disciplined player has moved
from club to club down the years, and even faced a rape charge last year. He reportedly spent months in police custody until
November for breaking bail conditions related to the alleged rape of a
19-year-old woman five years ago. Eagles first signed the player last May after being
released from Platinum Stars, and although details of his release from jail
remain sketchy at this stage, Eagles manager James Dlamini confirmed Zongo’s
return to the Midlands outfit. The 27-year-old ball wizard, who has also turned
out for SuperSport United and Bidvest Wits among other clubs in his career,
watched from the stands as Mbombela United defeated Royal Eagles 4-3 at Harry
Gwala Stadium on Saturday. And while Dlamini was upset by the result and could
not divulge information regarding the rape case when interviewed by The Witness
after the match, he maintained that the midfielder remained one of their own,
saying he should be allowed to rebuild his life. “Zongo is an Eagles player. We have never
terminated his contract. Yes, he left in those circumstances but he is out now
[of prison]. We sat down as the club management and had a long discussion about
the matter. We came to a conclusion that he should return to the club. So, yes
he is back and he is training with us again. Zongo has not played a professional match since he
was released from prison last year, and Dlamini said for now his focus will be
on regaining full fitness. He added: “We will see how he is doing but
obviously it will be very long before the coach can consider him to play. He
has to focus on training and getting himself fit again because he has not been
training or playing for quite some time now. He is unfit. But he is our player
and [we cannot just throw him away].” However, another source close to the club informed
the newspaper that head coach Kosta Papic is against the player’s return. “I’m not sure if he’s going to play anytime soon
because the coach is not happy that he was brought back by club boss Sbu
Mpisane. “So we don’t know what’s going to happen but he’s
back and he’s training with the players.” Eagles remain in an unfamiliar 14th spot on the
First Division log table after 16 matches.