Scottsville residents say Msunduzi Municipality garbage collectors have for months left garbage strewn outside their properties. Disgruntled residents, who said this happens “every Friday without fail” when workers collect garbage, recently escalated the matter to municipal officials, but continue to experience this problem. Anthony Waldhausen, the chairperson of the Cowdray Park flats body corporate on Leinster Road, had written to City officials to complain about this problem, and claimed he was told that the City would “follow up” the matter. He said, however, that there was no change last Friday. In an e-mail to officials, Waldhausen wrote: “When they pick up the refuse bags to put in the truck they break the bags and leave a mess on the verge.” He told The Witness that a general worker at his complex has to clear the rubbish from their verges afterwards. “I moved here in June last year, and it has been a problem ever since,” he said. “I just don’t know what to do. All they need to do is just pick up [the bin bags] and throw them in the truck. I don’t know if they drag the bags along the pavement or what happens to make the rubbish spill out.” He added: “It’s frustrating. We also see rats come and feed on what falls out of the rubbish bags. It’s a health hazard.” Acting Msunduzi spokesperson Siyabonga Hlongwa acknowledged receipt of questions sent via e-mail last week, but did not respond. Meanwhile, residents in other areas said they experienced this same problem. Commenting on a Facebook status on TheWitness’ Warriors page, residents claimed this was also a problem in Prestbury, Pelham, Chase Valley, Northdale and Mountain Rise. One resident wrote: “Should a bag break … the workers will not pick up the bits falling out. They will only take the black bag.” Another commented: “Many times the truck stops outside my house and has to compress the rubbish. In so doing all the sludge, grime, juices and small bits of rubbish get deposited [on] the road outside my house.” Recently, The Witness published a story about a refuse truck with no numberplates that was spilling piles of refuse onto busy streets in Scottsville. The driver took no notice of motorists who signalled to him to stop.