The success being enjoyed by new Proteas star Lungi Ngidi this week led to some novel experiences for his parents. Bongi and Jerome Ngidi, who live in Kloof, Durban, flew in an airplane and stayed in a hotel for the first time in their lives this week when they travelled to Johannesburg to watch him play. The 21-year-old fast-bowling sensation was playing against India in his second Test match. The five-day encounter started at The Wanderers in Johannesburg on Wednesday. On Tuesday Hilton College old boy Ngidi posted a picture on Twitter of himself and his parents in a hotel room. He wrote: “Look who arrived to watch the final test match, 1st time in a hotel, 1st time in joburg. Parents showing support #NgidiFamily.” On Wednesday television cameras captured the proud parents celebrating enthusiastically in The Wanderers stands when Ngidi took the sought-after wicket of Indian captain Virat Kohli. The young sensation made headlines when he claimed match figures of 7/90 on debut against India in Centurion last week. His 6/39 in the second innings helped the Proteas win by 135 runs and wrap up the three-Test series with a match to spare. He plays his domestic cricket for the Pretoria-based Titans. Ngidi hails from a humble background and grew up in Durban after his parents moved to Kloof from Kranskop. In Durban they are employed as cleaners at the Kloof Primary School. The Witness recently visited the couple at the Durban school. “We have never imagined that this time would come but it’s all God’s plan,” said Jerome. “We’re just happy that we’re both alive to witness it. We’re used to supporting him. From when he was in school, we would go to watch him play.” The multi-talented youngster is now a third-year law student at the University of Pretoria. His father added: “Lungani has always been a sports fanatic. “He played different sporting codes growing up and was actually good in all of them, though his coach then told him to focus on cricket. “It’s really been wonderful watching him realise his childhood dreams at such a young age. But, it’s our duty as parents to make sure he goes to varsity and gets a qualification. “I always remind him not to neglect his education because you never know what might happen. “Even if nothing happens, if one day he decides that he’s too old to play then he can do something else. He loves law and that’s what’s important.”