Maritzburg United are
in a very confident mood after winning four of their last six matches in the
Absa Premiership, but head coach Fadlu Davids says they will not under-estimate
struggling SuperSport United in this evening’s clash. The ‘Team of Choice’
host Eric Tinkler’s men from Pretoria at the Harry Gwala Stadium tonight,
having recorded an impressive four wins, three draws and one defeat out of
their last eight matches. They scored 13 goals
in those games. SuperSport, currently
in 13th, have recorded four defeats and four draws in the same number of games. The Tshwane side, who
have played two matches less than the Pietermaritzburg-based side, last enjoyed
success in the league in November when they beat Ajax Cape Town 1-0, but Davids
insists SuperSport they are not as bad as their current form suggests. Speaking to The
Witness on Tuesday, he said: “They are a dangerous side now. Not winning in
eight games, they are going to come out highly motivated and fired up. “It’s definitely a
game where we have to be cautious. We have to respect the opponent and the
qualities they have, and not just focus on their winless run, because they
built that team to fight for the title and challenge for honours.” He added: “In the
previous game, we won and I think it was merely the push of the crowd. The fans
really got behind the team. It will be really fantastic if by the end of the
season we can fill up the stadium, but it’s up to us. “We have to produce
good football and put on a good show again for them to come and see this
spectacle.” The last time the two
sides met was in the MTN8 when the eventual champions, Matsatsantsa, beat
Davids’ youthful side 2-1 in the second-leg in PMB, having drawn the first-leg
1-1 in Pretoria. But this time,
Maritzburg’s solid defence will not have to deal with the dangerous Jeremy
Brockie up front after he recently joined leaders Mamelodi Sundowns, but Davids
remains wary. “They’ve got quality
players. We can’t take them for granted. They’ve signed players to challenge
for the league, no doubt about that. They didn’t build the squad at the
beginning of the season to say they want to finish in the top eight. “So, they are
expected to win the title and that’s what we are expecting, to face a team that
is challenging for the title. With or without him, they have gone eight games
without a win and that makes it even tougher and they will coming here for all
three points.” Victory for the PMB
outfit would see them leapfrog third-placed Cape Town City on goal difference,
whereas for the visitors, the encounter presents them with an opportunity to
overtake Polokwane City in 11th position. Davids is likely to
field an unchanged team, with their latest addition at the back, Bokang Tlhone,
still sidelined by a knee injury, while winger Mxolisi Kunene, who missed the
past three games is available. Tickets are available
at Shoprite, Computicket, SuperSave supermarket, OK shop in College Road and at
the club’s offices in Victoria Street, at R40 for adults and R10 for pupils. Tonight’s [Wednesday]
kickoff is at 7.30 pm.