Suspended KwaZulu-Natal ANC provincial executive committee (PEC) members will keep their government positions. This is in spite of the decision by the party leadership to install an interim provincial leadership. Briefing the media in Durban, ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said the interim provincial task team (PTT) will not be able to call for the reshuffle of the provincial cabinet. “That’s a no-go terrain,” he said. The PTT is led by former Economic Development MEC Mike Mabuyakhulu, who campaigned for Cyril Ramaphosa before last month’s ANC elective conference. The co-ordinator of the 16-member PTT will, however, be the chairperson of the suspended PEC, Sihle Zikalala, who supported Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma at the national conference. The PTT is balanced between ANC members who supported Dlamini-Zuma and those who backed the victorious Ramaphosa. Magashule said that while the PTT will assume the functions of a PEC, its focus would be to prepare the province for a fresh elective conference, probably in the next three months. The establishment of the PTT follows last week’s ANC national executive committee (NEC) decision to suspend the KZN PEC after the Pietermaritzburg high court had declared it illegitimate. The PEC has since filed a notice to appeal the court judgment. While the NEC resolved that it was in the best interests of the ANC to suspend the PEC, the party has not opposed the decision to appeal. “The appeal will assist the ANC nationally to clarify its constitution,” said Magashule. The PTT will be supported by a five-member NEC team led by Environmental Affairs Minister Edna Molelwa. KZN is regarded as the stronghold of President Jacob Zuma, whose future as the head of state remains in the balance following last week’s NEC decision that he should be recalled. While some in the ANC view Zuma as a liability likely to dent the party’s image ahead of next year’s national general elections, there are fears within the party’s top leadership of a backlash from his KZN support base. ANC top six leadership members including Magashule, deputy secretary Jessie Duarte and chairperson Gwede Mantashe held a meeting with the suspended PEC before addressing the media. Zikalala told The Witness he was happy with the manner in which the PEC matter was being handled. While there has not been any official confirmation, speculation is rife that Zikalala and Mabuyakhulu will contest the provincial chair position when the provincial conference does take place.