The fine 2017 matric results achieved by pupils at Pietermaritzburg’s top public schools have been attributed to the tireless work of dedicated teachers and pupils.  Maritzburg College squared with Pietermaritzburg Girls’ High School (GHS) when it came to producing the highest number of pupils with distinctions. The schools each had two pupils with eight distinctions.  The Maritzburg Muslim School for Girls trailed behind with one pupil with eight As.  This amounted to five pupils from the city’s schools scoring eight As.  Maritzburg College’s deputy headmaster of academics Jeanette Finnie gave credit to “committed teachers and pupils” for the school’s strong performance.  She said the boys were involved in all spheres of life and had all the facilities they needed to give them the opportunity to succeed. “For us, it is extremely important that education is holistic. We are trying to produce a well-rounded individual who is prepared for adult life and university.”  Finnie added there were boys of “many different talents” and that success was not just about academics.  Maritzburg College also tied with Raisethorpe Secondary School as far as pupils with seven distinctions were concerned. Each school produced six pupils who achieved seven As.  Raisethorpe Secondary headmaster Indran Pillay said he was “chuffed”.  He too heaped praise on the teachers, pupils and parents. “I am glad for the pupils. It is the culmination of their hard work and realisation of their dreams that came true,” he said.  GHS came next, producing three pupils with seven As.  Acting principal Cathy Trodd said the school was proud of its pupils and their achievements.  “They have shown great commitment throughout the year. Thank you also to our teachers for their dedication. Everything of the best to all our 2017 matriculants,” she added.  Carter High and Heather Secondary had two pupils each boasting seven distinctions.  Venturing into a career in some sort of engineering is what the majority of the five pupils who obtained eight As will be doing.  Maritzburg College’s James Thomson will be studying computer engineering at the University of Pretoria. His advice to this year’s matriculants is: “Don’t procrastinate. Paying attention in class is very important.”  Hannah Parak of GHS, who performed equally well, has been invited to attend the function in Durban today where the province’s top pupils will be honoured. Another pupil, Sumaiya Vawda, who is also invited to the function, was not expecting the results she got. The soon-to-be actuarial science student from the Muslim School wants to make an impact in the world. “I have a far-fetched dream. Being a philanthropist on Wall Street,” she confessed. Also flying high with eight distinctions is Sara McInerney of GHS, who pulled more than one string in her matric year. She got to perform at the Carnegie Hall in New York as part of the KZN Youth Wind Band. The talented musician has opted to pursue a career in industrial engineering instead because “I want to make more of a difference in the world”. Maritzburg College’s Hendrik Le Roux, with seven distinctions, said he had “worked reasonably well” for his final exams and was excited about getting his detailed results. Shailin Pillay (17), also a College pupil with seven distinctions, was hopeful his results will secure him a spot to study medicine at the University of Cape Town. “My choice to study medicine has always been influenced by my parents because my dad is a doctor and my mother also works in a hospital,” said Shailin. Twins Janice and Janine Boodoo of GHS, along with Paige Bowton, got seven distinctions each. The proud mother of the twins, Michelle, said she felt “emotional” about her daughter’s good results and attributed it to their hard work. Bowton was ecstatic about her accomplishment and has a scholarship to study chartered accountancy. Ajeeth Ramasis (17) of Carter High School, with as many distinctions, said that although the year went quickly, he is glad it was over. He plans to study mechanical engineering at UKZN. Heather Secondary School’s top two pupils Sahil Bhangwandin and Aliya Singh both bagged seven distinctions and plan to study mechanical engineering. Bhangwandin exceeded his own expectations of getting five distinctions after writing the maths and accounting exam papers, which left him feeling disheartened. “I am quite surprised as I thought I had missed at least two As” he said. Singh said she had ben hopeful of acing all her seven subjects because she had managed to get seven distinctions during her trial exams.