More than a year after selling his property, a Pietermaritzburg man is still in the dark about the reasons why he has not been able to transfer the home to the new buyer.  Gareth Naude sold his simplex in Lincoln Meade in December 2016, but he has still not been able to obtain a rates clearance certificate from the Msunduzi Municipality, which would allow him to hand the property over to the new owner.  Based on correspondence with the City, the problem appears to be that the body corporate of the development owes money to the City, which it allegedly needs to settle before certificates can be issued. But Naude said another resident managed to sell his unit some time last year “and everything was cleared in two-and-a-half months.” He said he had tried numerous times to meet with City officials in the rates department to get to the bottom of this, but they “refused” to meet him.  He said he was now at his wits end. “I’ve tried contacting the people at the [City’s] rates office. I’ve tried the mayor, I’ve tried the municipal manager, but I have no answers.” He said: “At no stage has [the City] told myself or the attorneys that we should pay X amount to have the certificate issued.  “The complex itself is in arrears, [but] I get a separate rates account sent to me monthly ... which I pay.” He added: “I still have to pay the bond on this property, and that’s another expense I shouldn’t be paying.” He said that, luckily, the buyer is an investor and not someone who intends to move in.  The Witness tried to get to the bottom of this matter on Monday, but the various parties contacted could not shed light on why Naude has been unable to obtain a rates clearance certificate. A current body corporate member said they were not aware of debt owed to the City, and said such things were the responsibility of the property managers, Natal Property Consultants.  But a representative from Natal Property Consultants referred The Witness back to the body corporate, saying they could not shed light on the matter.  The conveyancing attorney declined to comment.  The Msunduzi Municipality on Monday acknowledged receipt of questions, but had not responded to the inquiry by late Monday. 