On Pastoral Road, in Northdale, there is a constant flow of water. Residents have complained that water has been seeping onto the long, winding residential road since December 23 last year. They have logged numerous complaints with the Msunduzi Municipality for more than a month, to no avail. The residents said they were concerned with the huge water wastage, and possible degradation of the road, the problem could bring. The Witness visited the site last Friday to find water bubbling out of a tiny hole in the middle of the road. Although the water was trickling out slowly, the downward slope of the road was covered with water — a testament to how much water seeps out of it. A resident who initially complained to The Witness said: “Water is flowing all the time, and as a ratepayer I’m concerned with the wastage and poor response from the municipality. This can eventually make a huge hole in the road.” Other residents said they were confused about what exactly was causing water to leak from the middle of the road. “Normally water leaks out of manholes or on [pavements], that’s where you find pipes being laid down. I don’t know what this problem could be — and it could be a big thing that could make workers have to dig up the road,” a resident said. “How the municipality can be so disinterested in this is amazing. There must have been thousands of litres wasted. This [leak] began before Christmas [last year].” Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha was furnished with a reference number logged last week for the leak, but did not answer detailed questions. Pietermaritzburg has been beset with leaks on public roads in recent months. The Witness reported last month about water gushing out of a manhole on Hoosen Haffejee (Berg) Street, between Pine Street and West Street, for several days. Residents threatened to shut down the street if Msunduzi did not intervene. Last year, it was reported that waste water from an Olympic swimming pool was somehow being diverted from the stormwater system to the sewage system, causing water to flood nearby homes. 