Maritzburg United currently boast the best defensive record
in the Absa Premiership after 16 matches, but defender Siyanda Xulu insists it
will count for nothing come Wednesday night when they host SuperSport United at
Harry Gwala Stadium. The Team of Choice have proved to be defensively disciplined
since the start of the campaign, having conceded just nine goals in the league
so far. The Pietermaritzburg-based outfit routed Bloemfontein Celtic 4-0 last
Friday to move up two places on the log, with Pogiso Sanoka, Mohau Mokate,
Andrea Fillecia and Evans Rusike all contributing a goal. Although their defence is often overlooked, including the
time when they endured a slump, the Midlands side have remained solid at the
back, but 26-year-old centre-back Xulu put their impressive defensive displays
down to discipline and team unity. Speaking to The Witness on Monday, he said it’s testament to
the organised brand of football that they have been playing under the watchful
eye of head coach Fadlu Davids. He said: “I think it’s really been incredible being a part
of this team. It’s not really about the defence or the midfield or any
particular department in the team. It’s the kind of football that we have been
playing and staying consistent in our performances. We are a very young team
with a lot of potential and I think what’s really kept us going is staying
united, especially in bad times. “It’s also great winning with such big scores at home. Most
of our wins have been away. We obviously haven’t reached our peak when it comes
to what we are capable of. But, we just have to keep moving.” The Durban-born defender, who joined United from Kaizer
Chiefs at the beginning of the season, has been an important member of the
club’s last line of defence, comprising of Pogiso Sanoka, Bevan Fransman and
recently-departed Denis Wieldich. He has made 18 appearances across all competitions,
including three Cup games, scoring one goal in the process. Wieldich recently joined Bidvest Wits in a swap involving
defender Bokang Tlhone, who is ruled out for at least two months with a knee injury
he suffered during a friendly match with his former club. Davids’ men have kept almost 10 clean sheets this season,
with formidable Ghanaian goalkeeper Richard Ofori making a number of solid
saves in goal. Xulu said they would approach Wednesday’s game against
SuperSport in the usual fashion. “It’s still a long journey. We have to stay
grounded and, as the coach has been warning us, to guard against complacency.
We just need to continue playing as a unit and take a lesson from what we went
through when the season started ...” Kick-off tomorrow is at 7.30 pm.