A proposal to put up a series of multi-storey housing blocks
in Blackridge will overburden already strained municipal infrastructure and
destroy the tranquillity of the area, residents say. Msunduzi has confirmed that it has received a rezoning
application for the property on which the development is being proposed. The
next step will be to conduct hearings into objections. According to a notice of application to rezone the site,
situated on a large property at 248 Sweetwaters Road, the plan is to build 26
three-storey blocks with housing units ranging from one  bedroom to three bedrooms. A diagram attached
to the notice shows the development, which sits between parts of Braeside Road
and Mbubu Road, will have hundreds of parking bays. Msunduzi has been asked to rezone the piece of land, which
appears to be more than three hectares, from “special residential” to “general
residential 1 zone” which would allow for such a development. Details of the developer behind the rezoning application
have not been made public, but Lawrence van Heerden, a development planning
consultant involved in the project, told The Witness he had been in touch  with the developer via e-mail. He was
reluctant to release the name of his client. “I have forwarded your e-mail to
the client and have been instructed to inform you that all the information you
require is set out in the documents that are available at the municipality.
Sorry but my hands are tied. “We are busy putting together a response to the objections
which will take a few weeks. Once this is done I will ask the client if we can
include you in the circulation of this latter document,” said Van Heerden in
response to inquiries by The Witness. The Witness asked the municipality for the documents  but was told that since the closing date for
comments on November 27 had passed, the documents were no longer available for
public viewing. They will only become available again when a formal hearing is
held in the New Year. Members of the Blackridge community have expressed their
concerns that if such a development were to go ahead it would have dire
consequences as the area would be unable to accommodate such a large influx of
people and cars. Several residents have submitted formal objections to the
City ahead of a mass meeting being planned to discuss a plan of action by
affected residents. Community members said they fear such a development will add
further strain to the ageing infrastructure in the area, which has of late been
showing its age with frequent electricity outages. The community has also complained that the large development
would increase the traffic in the area and beyond to the point where it would
be a “nightmare” for surrounding roads which are not suited to cope with the
volume. They have also claimed that only homeowners in the immediate
vicinity were informed about the proposed development despite the fact that the
ramifications of it could potentially affect areas as far as Clarendon,
Prestbury and Boughton. The site itself has an abandoned home on it which is
surrounded by dense bush and tall trees. The site is fenced off and behind a
locked gate. “This area is a green belt, and we bought homes here to be
away from developments like this,” one resident told The Witness. “Some of us moved here 30 years ago and we moved here just
for that.” Another said: “Blackridge is a tranquil, quiet neighbourhood
of mostly freestanding houses. That is the beauty of living here: it is not
close to the CBD.” She added that the area simply would not be able to deal
with hundreds more vehicles in rush-hour periods, and said many roads were
already severely damaged. “Take a drive from the Botanical Gardens [on Zwartkop
Road] to Winterskloof … at 7.30 am on a school day — good luck,” said the
resident. Local councillor Ross Strachan said the area’s
infrastructure capacity was already stressed without an influx of hundreds of
new residents. “I’m not opposed to any private development, especially due
to the fact that our city needs development desperately … [but] it would not be
sustainable, especially in the Blackridge area which is constantly affected by
prolonged service delivery outages in particular electricity. “If the developers are proposing such a dense population
development that will increase the pressure without any upgrades being done
prior, it would be detrimental to that community,” he said. Msunduzi Municipality confirmed it had received objections
from members of the community and said a public hearing will be held to air any
concerns. “It must be noted that the application is in its initial
stage. A decision has not been made whether the project will be approved or
not. “We have to follow the processes first in terms of the
bylaws,” spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said. 