A man who was found guilty on Friday of raping two
University of KwaZulu-Natal students whilst they were en route to their campus
residence in 2016, is due for sentencing on Monday. The incident described by Pietermaritzburg magistrate
Muntukayise Khumalo, as “gross” and one of the worst rape cases he has come
across, took place at the Woodburn Stadium. The BSc students were aged 23 and 24 at the time and one of
them was a virgin. She bled profusely after the rape, had a seizure and
collapsed at the police station. The magistrate said that after Sibusiso Zondi raped the
women several times, he’d phoned a person to gloat. He forced one of them to
tell the person about the rapes. The person asked where they were and she told
him. Zondi then grabbed the phone and continued speaking. “It occurred to her [one of the women] that at that moment
Zondi was enjoying what he was doing to them,” said the magistrate. He added that the person on the other end wanted to know if
Zondi could “give him one of the girls he was raping”. This person called when he was at the stadium. But, Zondi
lied to him that he took the women home. Khumalo said the two women had been walking home at around
2.30 am from a church service when they came across Zondi along Alan Paton
Avenue. They did not know him. As they continued walking, he pointed a firearm at them and
demanded they give him their cellphones. At the time the women were close to the Woodburn Stadium. He
ordered them to walk to a bushy secluded area of the stadium where he
repeatedly raped both of them at knifepoint. Khumalo said both women told the court how the rape had
affected their lives. One failed her BSc degree in dietetics and had to repeat
it. The other also failed to the “extent that the university discontinued her
registration”. The incident also made one woman “lose faith” because the
incident happened when they were coming from a church service. Khumalo said that Zondi’s defence was false beyond
reasonable doubt. His version was that he knew both the women from taverns and
that he had sexual intercourse with one of them at his home. However, he
changed the date of when they were intimate three times. Khumalo said evidence led by state prosecutor Mariam
Aboobaker was led in a very straight forward manner. He found the state
witnesses were honest and reliable while Zondi’s version on the other hand was
“riddled with inconsistencies, concocted and manufactured”. Khumalo said that both witnesses had a good look at Zondi
and were able to identify him as the rapist. There was also DNA evidence
linking him to the rape of one of the women, he said. Sentencing procedures take place on Monday. 