The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal which has been rattled by divisions, for the first time on Wednesday showed no signs of factional tendencies and announced its readiness to do elections battle, vowing to crush opposition parties in next year’s polls. “Factions within the ANC are now a thing of the past, we now have only one ANC and one president. “We are now united around a single goal of ensuring a resounding victory for the ANC in KZN and nationally,” the party’s provincial chairperson, Sihle Zikalala said. Zikalala, who is also the MEC for economic development, was speaking during the opening of the party’s provincial list conference in Durban where delegates by late last night were still busy electing party members that will represent them in Parliament after next year’s polls. “We will emerge out of this conference with one powerful voice, and as for the opposition parties that had been praying for the demise of the ANC our message is very clear — we will shrink your support at the elections, Zikalala said. The ANC in the province had been struggling to put its house in order following internal sharp divisions caused by last year’s power struggle between President Cyril Ramaphosa, sometimes referred to as CR, and former AU chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who supporters refer to as NDZ. “The issue of the CR and NDZ factions is now a thing of the past, our focus is that of going to each and every street, every house and every village to ensure that people vote for the ANC in large numbers at the elections,” Zikalala said. Unlike in previous ANC provincial gatherings where tensions between the Ramaphosa and Dlamini-Zuma supporters could easily be felt, the conference delegates, for the first time, showed a united front. Divisions within the ANC in the province in the past forced the party leadership to postpone the provincial conference on several occasions. Dlamini-Zuma’s supporters, who also back former President Jacob Zuma, had used the previous gathering to demonstrate their rejection of Ramaphosa and the new ANC national leadership elected during last December’s highly contested national elective conference. However, the mood amongst the delegates attending Wednesday’s conference was different. Clad in the ANC’s gold, black and green colours, the delegates sang and danced as conference proceedings got underway. The list conference is used to elect ANC members who will represent the party in the provincial and national legislatures after next year’s elections. Dlamini-Zuma is expected to garner the highest votes to represent the party in the National Assembly, while Zikalala is expected to receive the highest votes to represent the ANC in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature.