A gaping trench dug across Braithwaite Road has irked
Montrose residents who fear it will cause a serious accident if left unrepaired
for longer. The trench was reportedly dug up by a municipal contractor
as part of the cable installation project around the city. Some of the trenches that were dug up for the same purpose
have since been fixed, but The Witness is aware of a few that have not. Montrose residents say the one on Braithwaite Road was dug
up several months ago. They said it had since gotten wider and deeper due to
the rain and motorists driving over it. They say drivers cannot always slow down on time before they
hit the trench as it is not visible from a distance, at night or when it rains. Montrose Community Watch leader Megan Nicol said the trench
was dug up more than three months ago and there was no explanation from the
City as to why it had not been filled. She said the ratepayers had themselves tried to fill it with
gravel but most of it had also been washed away. “It’s a hazard because some drivers can’t see it until they
are right on top of it. We’ve been telling the municipality that someone is
going to get hurt but they still do nothing,” she said. Yolandi Erasmus said she had witnessed two incidents where
people nearly got hurt because of the trench. Both accidents involved scooters where the wheels got stuck,
causing the bikes to wobble. A recent incident involved resident Mike Muskett’s
19-year-old daughter who fell off and injured her wrist and elbow. He said she
was on her way to see her grandparents when it happened. “That trench has been there for ages and we try and take a
different route to get to other places but we have to go over it to get to my
parent’s house,” said Muskett. He said he did not understand why Msunduzi had not sent
someone to fix the trench because leaving it unattended only made it bigger as
some people used Braithwaite Road on daily basis. “In the incidents I saw both [victims] didn’t suffer serious
injuries but I don’t think we should wait until someone is badly hurt before we
actually do something,” said Erasmus. She said several ratepayers had written to Msunduzi
inquiring about plans to fix the trench but they got a generic response. “They [municipality] said it had to do with an internal
policy but we don’t even know what that policy says and if they have any
intention of ever fixing our road.” The residents are now looking for quotes from paving companies
that could do the repairs. Erasmus said it was better to pay a private
contractor than to have someone pay with their life in an accident. Msunduzi had not responded to The Witness query at the time
of publication despite being given two days in which to do so. 