The RDP house occupied by murder accused Msunduzi councillor Nkosinathi “TK” Gambu was allegedly meant for a pensioner who is living in a dilapidated mud house. It has emerged that the house Gambu has been occupying since 2014 was meant for 56-year-old Ngcane Sithole of KwaPata who applied for the house decades ago when floods destroyed her family house. But uMgungundlovu District Municipality deputy mayor Thandiwe “Fucwana” Zungu, who is Gambu’s aunt, has been accused by the community in the area of being behind the reason the house was not allocated to Sithole. However, she told The Witness that the house had been allocated to her in-laws, not to Gambu. A search on the Department of Human Settlements’ housing subsidy portal using Sithole’s identity number confirms that the house being occupied by Gambu has the same site number as that allocated to Sithole. Gambu stands accused of the murder of popular ANC Midlands activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu, who was shot and killed in May this year, in the KwaPata area. He has been denied bail alongside his co-accused — his cousin Gift Zungu, Nkanyiso Zimu, Sifiso Mbele, and Ayanda Ngubane. Yesterday Sithole told of her wait for her house. “The Department of Human Settlements has always maintained that my house had been allocated and even said that the person who is occupying the house might even have extended it,” said Sithole, who was clutching printouts she has been given by the department. “For years I have been sent from pillar to post. I cannot apply for another RDP house because of this. It is sad that people who are well-off are occupying that house while I am struggling to make a living here.” Sithole lives with her three children and two grandchildren, all of whom are unemployed. Disposable nappies that had been washed and hung on a washing line told of the family’s desperate situation. “All I want is my house. That house belongs to me,” she said. Deputy Mayor Zungu insisted that the house belonged to her family. “The house belongs to my in-laws. The house was meant for my mother-in-law but she refused to occupy the house because it is too far from our family home. “I was part of the development committee which allocated the houses and I know what I am talking about. “All of this is part of propaganda to drag my son’s name through the mud. I am getting tired of this propaganda and I am going to sue people,” she said. KZN Department of Human Settlements spokesperson Mbulelo Baloyi said the houses had not been allocated by the department. “The local municipality allocated the houses,” he said. Msunduzi municipal spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo did not respond to queries. Joyce Noswili told how she had been kicked out of the same house in 2014 to make way for Gambu. Noswili had occupied the house since 2001 as she waited for her own RDP house, which she had applied for alongside Sithole after the 80s floods. “I was told I had overstayed my welcome in the house. I pleaded with them to at least give me the opportunity to build my house on the site that had been allocated for my house,” she said. The 63-year-old Noswili works in a local creche and has since built her own three-roomed house out of her savings.