uMgungundlovu District Municipality deputy mayor, Fucwana Zungu, has been arrested by members of the political killings task team, her family confirmed on Sunday. “They arrested her on Saturday afternoon, she is currently at the police cells,” Zungu’s husband, Thulani, said. According to her husband, who said he was with the deputy mayor when members of the task team arrested her, she was arrested in full view of the public while shopping in Pietermaritzburg. “We were in a supermarket in town when they approached her while all the other shoppers were watching. They showed her a warrant of arrest before taking her way. She is currently being detained at the Howick police station,” he said. Zungu’s bodyguards were not with her when members of the task team arrested her. A former member of the ANC Moses Mabhida regional executive committee, Zungu is the aunt of Msunduzi Municipality ward 10 councillor Nkosinathi “TK” Gambu, who alongside the deputy mayor’s son, Gift, is currently in custody in connection with the murder of Pietermaritzburg ANC activist, Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu. Mchunu was shot dead at his home in KwaPata in May. Gambu, who was brought up by Zungu, had reportedly had a fallout with Mchunu due to political differences. In his failed bail application in November, Gambu told the Pietermaritzburg high court that he belonged to the ANC faction that supported former AU chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma during the party’s presidential elections won by President Cyril Ramaphosa. On the other hand, Mchunu belonged to the Ramaphosa faction that had been at loggerheads with the Gambu and Zungu faction in the region. The task team yesterday declined to comment on the deputy mayor’s arrest. “We don’t comment on ongoing investigations ... we will give an update on the work of the task team at the appropriate time,” national police spokesperson, Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo, said. The task team, which was established by Ramaphosa in June, is currently investigating the killing of several politicians whose deaths are suspected to be linked to the recent political violence in the province. While Zungu has been part of ANC factions in the region, her husband said members of the task team did not mention anything about political killings when they arrested her. “They said she was being arrested for fraud and corruption,” he said. The Witness recently reported that a Pietermaritzburg woman, Ngcane Sithole (56) had claimed that the house in KwaPata currently occupied by Gambu, belonged to her. Some community members in the KwaPata area had claimed that Zungu had used her political position to get the house, which is part of houses that were built by the state for victims of floods, allocated to Gambu instead of Sithole. Zungu’s husband said that it had been difficult to get details from the task team on the specific charges faced by Zungu. “I tried to explain the issue of the house to them but they were not interested, they said the details will be revealed in court,” he said. In October members of the task team raided Zungu’s house in KwaPata.