One of Maritzburg’s most famous cricket sons, Kevin Pietersen, visited his old school on Thursday to film a documentary about his famous but controversial life. The programme is produced by UK television channel Sky Sports and looks at the former England skipper’s career, including his education in South Africa. The 38-year-old, who retired from cricket earlier this year, spent time at Maritzburg College on Thursday where he was interviewed by another former England cricket captain, Nasser Hussain. The jet-setting cricketer told The Witness that his visit to Maritzburg meant “a helluva lot” to him and he ought to do it more often because of his emotional attachment to the place. He also said he was proud of his achievements, including his elevation to the captaincy of England. “Coming back to Pietermaritzburg means a helluva lot to me. It’s something I don’t do often, it’s something I haven’t had a chance of doing for a very long time, so it’s nice,” he said. “This is where everything started, so it’s nice to be back at my roots.” Pietersen has enjoyed a career as one of the most gifted batsmen in the world but has also been no stranger to controversy, as he was often on the wrong page with management during his playing years. He switched allegiance in the early 2000s to play for England as he claimed his future in South Africa was affected by affirmative action. He went on to help the English national team win the Ashes 2005 and the ICC T20 World Cup in 2007. He said his story would not have been complete without this visit to his home town. “I’m incredibly proud of everything that I have achieved and all the wonderful people that I have met, all the great friends that I have made and everything that cricket gave me,” he said. “We have spoken to young cricketers here today and I think my story inspires a lot of young cricketers because nobody thought I would excel. “From my side, from my perspective of the story, anything is possible if you are prepared to work hard and achieve things.”