The City is revamping its controversial call centre which
has been marred with problems related to rude agents, an outdated system and
staff shortages. The call centre has been a source of frustration for
ratepayers and councillors who sometimes cannot get through to, or deal with,
ill-mannered staff. The multi-million rand upgrade follows an October site
inspection by the municipality’s strategic management committee (SMC) following
several complaints about the functioning of its call centre. Acting City manager Neli Ngcobo said they requested the
manager, Nqobile Madonda, to prioritise issues of importance because the
municipality was “bleeding” when it came to the call centre. According to
Madonda’s report, an estimated R30 million was required to revamp the facility,
however, Ngcobo said the municipality was prioritising the urgent issues first
and the rest would be done as funding became available. In October it was found that the agents did not believe that
the working environment was conducive due to inadequate space, non-functioning
air conditioners and there were concerns about the cleanliness of the office. The report also highlighted human resources challenges as
there were allegations of abuse of sick leave by some of the agents. The call centre faced staff shortages as only 20 of the 32
approved positions had been filled. Madonda also raised the issue of staff morale, saying it was
down because the agents believed they were short paid. They had lodged a task grade grievance requesting their job
descriptions to be reviewed. They believe they should be on the same pay grade
as the emergency services call centre agents. SMC recently approved the purchase of an air conditioner
worth R20 000, a web-based interface costing R250 000, a R25 000 printing
machine and expansion of offices, while 10 staff members were seconded to call
centre agent positions to address the shortages. The City has also acquired a R300 000 voice data recording
software to help in dealing with the rude agents. Ngcobo said future plans included getting a system that
would also allow the management to listen to conversations and monitor how long
the callers were kept on the phone before it was answered. The information and communications technology section,
however, cautioned the municipality against “throwing gadgets at a problem
which quite often doesn’t yield the desired results as most challenges
experienced at the call centre are not technology-related but more of a human
factor and poor business processes”. The human resources section said council had appointed a
team to conduct a work study in order to identify gaps where employees were
idle and some were overloaded which was hoped to streamline the functions and
address challenges identified.