Nine senior managers have put their necks on the line and written to the national and provincial government pleading for their urgent intervention in the ailing Msunduzi Municipality. The petition, which The Witness has seen, was addressed to the then ministers of Finance Malusi Gigaba and Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Des van Rooyen. It was also sent to KZN MECs for Finance, Belinda Scott, and for Cogta, Nomusa Dube-Ncube. The managers allege that “administrative malfeasance” is rife in Msunduzi. They said this has a negative impact on ratepayers, who are beset with poor service delivery and chronic failures of municipal services. “We believe the current levels of maladministration and the growing trust deficit within the administrative team is out of control and will escalate exponentially in the future if not immediately curbed,” reads the petition. They said the council has not taken their warnings about the state of affairs seriously nor treated them with the urgency they deserve. “We believe there are unethical overtures by the accounting officer (City manager Sizwe Hadebe) to centralise power through non-adherence to the municipality’s System of Financial and Administration Delegations, in order to institutionalise maladministration, make the ground fertile for acquisition of absolute power and concomitant abuse of power,” they said. They group added that under Hadebe’s leadership the City received a disclaimer audit opinion for the 2016/2017 financial year because he is allegedly running the administration without observing fiduciary care and sound, ethical governance. They also accused Hadebe of marginalising the heads of business units by taking away their powers, which had left them not being able to carry out some of their responsibilities. “The level of administrative interference by the accounting officer in line function operations has created a working environment that is totally unconducive to optimum performances of business units, and is directly adversely affecting effective, efficient and economical service delivery. “Several managers who are lynchpins to a functional administrative system are on protracted suspension and this is preventing them from rendering specialist expertise in their respective areas of jurisdiction,” the managers said. They said the council has been deliberately misled and ill-advised by Hadebe on various occasions, which has resulted in un-procedural and irregular administrative decisions. They requested administrative intervention and immediate end to maladministration, which they said would assist to reverse the disclaimer audit opinion. They also wanted a formal inquiry into all the maladministration in Msunduzi. “We pray for disciplinary action against all those found guilty of the maladministration [and] in contravention of the code of conduct of municipal employees. “We pray for the preferring of civil and criminal action against those found to have committed criminal acts and bringing the municipality into disrepute,” said the managers in their petition. MEC Scott confirmed that she received the petition. She said she forwarded it to the Premier Willies Mchunu because she believed it would be best dealt with by his office.