The ANC tripartite alliance partners in Pietermaritzburg have come out in support of Monday’s service delivery and anti-corruption march to the City Hall. On Thursday, regional leaders of the South African National Civic Organisation (Sanco), Cosatu and the SACP said they will join hands with ANC councillors in Msunduzi, Mtuza Mkhize and Ningi Zungu, in a three-month campaign to purge Msunduzi of corrupt individuals. Councillors Zungu and Mkhize, who is also a regional executive member, said the voices of those who spoke up against corruption were silenced within the ruling party. They said President Cyril Ramaphosa’s vow to fight corruption gave them the courage to put their necks on the line. Monday’s march will be the launch of a three-month campaign which the organisers hope will attract all residents of Msunduzi. “[There will be] no more tolerance for mediocrity and barbaric conduct motivated by greed and corruption,” Cosatu’s Zima­sile Giyama said during a joint press briefing on Thursday. He said they want to see criminal charges brought against those involved in the theft of millions from the municipality. Giyama said someone should also be held accountable for the fruitless expenditure in terms of the salaries of people on suspension. “R11 million was used to pay salaries of workers who are on a protracted unfair suspension, some of whom have not yet been charged months after their suspension. This is part of the bully tactics against workers who dare challenge the dynasty in Msunduzi,” he said. Sanco’s Fanle Sibisi said one of their priorities was to get the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Nomusa Dube-Ncube to place Msunduzi under administration. He said the municipality was on the verge of collapse and he does not believe things will change if the people in charge are not removed from their positions, or have their powers taken away from them. Giyama and Sibisi also spoke of the alleged unfair dismissal of 1 052 municipal employees in December 2016 after they were accused of supporting another ANC faction. The matter is currently before the Labour Court. “I can tell you now that many times councillors are forced to vote in favour of something they are totally against. Many of us were against the 80-year lease for the sports academy,” said Mkhize. Last month The Witness reported that Midlands District Academy of Sport (MDAS) want to extend their three-year lease with the City for the Wanderers Club in Scottsville, to 80 years. At the time, the director of the academy, Vincent Myeni, wanted to invest millions into the upgrading of the Wanderers but could not do so due to the lease constraints. The SACP’s Ru Madlala said all the attempts to engage the political and administrative leadership about the paralysis, which has seen crime escalating in Msunduzi, were ignored. “The dissolution of the Msunduzi executive committee is not negotiable. We shall relentlessly pursue it through a rolling mass action. We promise the people of Pietermaritzburg that what they saw in 2011 [service delivery marches] will be like a Sunday morning picnic compared with what they will see in 2018 if our demands are not addressed as a matter of urgency,” he said.