 The ANC NEC was late last night reported to have decided to tell
President Jacob Zuma that he must resign or be recalled, and given him 48 hours
to react. News24 reported a source inside
the NEC as saying party president Cyril Ramaphosa and secretary-general Ace
Magashule had left the meeting venue to deliver the news to Zuma. There was no official
confirmation or announcement by the time of going to press. Ramaphosa’s car was seen
leaving the St George’s Hotel at Irene outside Pretoria, where domestic and international
journalists had been camped for hours, awaiting the news the country had been
promised. Unlike at previous NEC meetings
where journalists were able to communicate with individuals inside the talks,
there was a complete information blackout, with rumours that NEC members were
barred from bringing their cellphones into the venue. Ramaphosa had raised
expectations when he announced in Cape Town on Sunday that the matter around
Zuma’s future was on the verge of being finalised. Zuma, facing allegations of
state capture, could also face criminal charges should the National Prosecuting
Authority (NPA) decide to reinstate charges of corruption and fraud that were
withdrawn shortly before he became the country’s president in 2009. Ramaphosa, who called Monday’s
meeting following what sources claimed was the collapse of the week-long exit
talks between him and Zuma, is under pressure to get the president axed. Expectations were high that the
ANC, which does not have the power to remove Zuma from office, was going use Monday’s
NEC meeting to recall Zuma and initiate parliamentary processes to remove him
from power. However, failure by the ANC to
communicate the NEC’s decision on Zuma’s recall left ordinary citizens, civil
organisations and opposition more confused than before. “It is difficult for South
Africans to understand why the ANC is taking so long to make such a
straightforward decision. People are beginning to doubt whether this new ANC
leadership has what is required to pull out the country from the challenges it
is currently facing,” Save South Africa convener Sipho Pityana said. Mounting calls for Zuma to be
removed as the country’s president last week resulted in Parliament postponing
the State of the Nation Address (Sona) that was previously scheduled to be
delivered by Zuma last week. Political analyst Mcebisi
Mdletyana said the fact that the ANC had not yet removed Zuma several weeks
after indicating its willingness to recall him showed that he was using every
loophole to avoid being removed from power. “It appears he is even willing to
bring the ANC house down if that would mean him clinging on to power,” he said. In the late afternoon, hopes of
a resolution wewre raised whern the SABC reported that Zuma had agreed to step
down. However, this report was
dismissed by both the ANC and the Presidency, which described it as “fake
news”. Call to dissolve Parliament: opposition also wants a say News24 — Parliament must be
dissolved because it was also complicit in President Jacob Zuma’s failure to
uphold the Constitution, opposition parties have argued. Opposition parties o
Monday upped the pressure on the ANC by calling for Parliament’s
dissolution if Zuma is removed through a scheduled EFF motion of no
confidence. “Everyone in South Africa has
called for the removal of Jacob Zuma,” DA leader Mmusi Maimane said at a press
briefing in Parliament. “In the context of that, we can’t be spectators to the
ANC’s internal factions. Let us go to Parliament and remove Zuma.” The plan, therefore, is to
debate the EFF’s motion as soon as possible, and, if successful, table a second
motion calling for Parliament’s dissolution. The EFF’s strategic tabling
of its motion ensures it will be the first of its nature to be
debated on the subject, and would have a chance of passing if the
ANC’s national executive committee orders Zuma to be recalled. The parties argue that, were
the ANC to vote with the opposition on the EFF’s motion, they would be agreeing
to the same reasons for Zuma’s removal. Those reasons in the
motion are that Zuma failed to uphold the Constitution during the Nkandla
debacle, as ruled by the Constitutional Court in 2016. Parliament was also implicated
in that judgment, for failing to hold the president to account on the matter. If the ANC agrees to
remove Zuma on those grounds, it must therefore also dissolve Parliament for
the same reasons. The ANC caucus could choose to
amend the EFF’s motion on the day though, to take out the explicit reasons for
Zuma’s removal. Deputy Speaker Lechesa Tsenoli on Monday said Parliament was
“consulting” on the request to move the date to this week. The dissolution motion is
unlikely to take place on the same day as a motion of no confidence, however.
Section 50 of the Constitution states that, if a president is removed through a
motion of no confidence, and his entire cabinet resigns, then there is only one
item on the agenda: to elect a new president within 30 days. Baleka Mbete as
Speaker assumes the presidency until a new member is elected from among
the members within the time period, Section 90 confirms. Parliament will, therefore, be
free to debate the subject, only after a new permanent president is appointed.
If no president is elected within 30 days, Parliament dissolves anyway. Mbete assumes the presidency
for a further 90 days, and new elections must be held within that period.
Cabinet continues its duties in the interim until a new president is sworn in.  