Former senior Witness journalist Yves­ Vanderhaeghen has been appointed editor of the newspaper. Media 24 Print Media general manager Ishmet Davidson announced on Thursday: “It gives me great pleasure to welcome Yves back on board as the newly appointed editor of The Witness, a newspaper he has called home for the greater part of his journalism career.” Vanderhaeghen takes over the reins on February 15. He started his career at The Witness in 1984. After a short break in 1987, when he joined Business Day, Vanderhaeghen returned and worked his way up the ranks to deputy editor. He resigned in 2011 to pursue an academic career at the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Centre for Media and Cultural Studies, where he earned his PhD in 2015. He had been teaching there part-time since 1997 and was responsible for developing the first ever course in media and cultural studies as part of the English curriculum. “Yves is a Witness man through and through, with an unparalleled knowledge of the paper, its people, the unique news environment and the target market,” said Davidson. “We also have great respect for his dedication to identifying and developing young talent. I look forward to working closer with him as he takes this strategically important title forward and develops its full potential.” Vanderhaeghen said he was excited about the challenge: “A city newspaper such as The Witness is a jewel in the daily life of a community. We talk to each other, argue with each other, and always look after each other’s welfare as we weather, ride, and sometimes drive the course of history together. “Even though I haven’t been in the news engine room for a while, I have followed the fortunes of The Witness closely, and am excited to be back. The city and the province are entering a momentous period in which both will be fundamentally reshaped, so there’s a big challenge ahead.” Davidson paid tribute to acting editor Chris Whitfield, the veteran Cape Town journalist who stepped in for six months: “A heartfelt thank you to Chris, who will be leaving us at the end of February when his contract expires, for standing in when we needed him and for doing such a great job.” It was a sentiment echoed by Vanderhaeghen. 