 There teams advanced to the Nedbank Cup round of 16 midweek and another 10 berths will be decided in a bumper knockout programme this weekend. Maritzburg United and three other KZN hopefuls will be in action. Absa Premiership sides Cape Town City and AmaZulu booked their places in the next round along with National First Division strugglers Ubuntu Cape Town who brushed aside Premiership team Polokwane City in the midweek games. Maritzburg United will be on the road to amateurs Swallows FC on Saturday and Royal Eagles to the Happy Wanderers on Sunday. Some of the other interesting match-ups are Kaizer Chiefs versus Golden Arrows, Bloemfontein Celtic versus SuperSport United, and Orlando Pirates versus Ajax Cape Town. Maritzburg will be looking to replicate their league form in the Cup, while coach Roger Skhakhane, who has been roped in to stabilise the sinking Eagles ship following the sacking of Kosta Papic this week, is likely to be on the bench for his debut at Sugar Ray Xulu Stadium in Durban on Sunday against local amateur team Wanderers. Maritzburg coach Fadlu Davids will be minus four key players for the Soweto trip with captain Bevan Fransman, Sphesihle Ndlovu, Bandile Shandu and Deolin Mekoa all serving suspensions. Nonetheless, Swallows coach Isaac Mphasane expects a tough battle against the “Team of Choice” and will be approaching Saturday’s clash with caution. “Maritzburg is a PSL team and, to be honest, they are doing well in the league. They’ve got a lot of quality players in their squad, so it’s going to be a tough game, but again it’s a good platform for the youngsters to learn from experienced players,” he said. “We’ll use this as an opportunity to show PSL teams that there’s a lot of talent in the ABC Motsepe league. “It’s going to be a difficult game. I’ve been watching Maritzburg and they have been giving a lot of big teams in the PSL a hard time. So it’s not going to be easy and we will give them the respect they deserve.” Meanwhile, Arrows coach Clinton Larsen said his side were clear underdogs going into their clash with Steve Komphela’s Chiefs at FNB Stadium on Sunday. He said: “For us, it’s a nice reprieve from the pressures of the league. I believe we are going into the Cup as underdogs, and the Nedbank Cup is a competition that can be won by underdogs. “We are a strong unit of players and this allows us to shift focus to the Cup. The stage couldn’t be better to have some of our Diski players showcase themselves, and we are excited to see them prove themselves.”NEDBANK CUP LAST-32 FIXTURES: FridayCT All Stars v Mamelodi Sundowns — 8 pm SaturdaySwallows FC v Maritzburg Utd — 3.30 pmSteenberg United v Orbit College — 3.30 pmPhiva Young Stars v Chippa Utd — 3.30 pm Orlando Pirates v Ajax CT — 8.15 pm Super Eagles v Free State Stars — 8.15 pm Sunday Mariveni United v EC Bees — 3.30 pmKaizer Chiefs v Golden Arrows — 3.30 pmHappy Wanderers v Royal Eagles — 3.30 pmBloem Celtic v SuperSport Utd — 3.30 pm  