A popular Imbali nightclub was rocked by a fatal shooting in the early hours of Sunday morning. According to a witness to the shooting, Thembelani Nsele (33), a meter taxi driver, was killed after he became embroiled in an argument over a woman outside 033 Life­style. The club had hosted popular Durban deejay Bongs and the shooting incident is alleged to have occurred at 3 am. The man said: “We were parked outside waiting for customers; there was an argument outside the venue, and to our knowledge it was about a woman. “Thembe and I immediately separated the two parties and we tried speak to both groups to try and defuse the situation because we knew the men who were fighting. They went their way, and we went our way,” he said. “But then we saw one of the guys get into his car and he returned with a gun in his hand.” Nsele tried to step in again but a few minutes later he was shot in the mouth, the witness said. The man said he had managed to take down the shooter’s car number plate before he fled the scene. “I was shocked and devastated at the same time. “I rushed him to the clinic but he passed away not long after,” he said. Plessislaer police spokesperson Captain Musa Ntombela said no arrests have been made yet and the investigation continues. Nsele’s mother Thandi said her family was reeling from the death of her son. She said she received a call at 3.20 am informing her about the incident. “We rushed to the clinic but when we arrived they told us he had already died.” Thandi said she was dissatisfied that police had not arrested the shooter. “What is stopping them from arresting my son’s killer? We have given them a name and there were witnesses at the scene. Why has this man not been arrested?” she said. She described her son as a “respectful” person who got along with everyone. The owner of 033 Lifestyle, Bonga Ndaba, said, “As a venue we pride ourselves in safeguarding our patrons, and this was an unfortunate incident beyond our control. “We hope that the police will arrest the perpetrator soon.”