Struggling Royal Eagles have signed midfielder Mpho Mvelase, Ghanaian Victor Bakah and striker Ryan Chapman in their bid to avoid being relegated from the National First Division. The three players were free agents and this is how Eagles were able to recruit them outside the transfer window, which ended on January 31. In confirming the acquisitions, the club’s general manager, James Dlamini, said they needed the trio badly because of their desperate situation in the league, where they sit just one point above the relegation zone. “We do have the three players here at the club. They have not been registered yet, but they should be available to play the next game,” he said.The Pietermaritzburg side recently brought in a new coach in Roger Skhakhane, following the sacking of Serbian Kosta Papic. Skhakhane was content with earning a point in his first official league assignment against equally struggling Uthongathi FC at Harry Gwala Stadium on Saturday. The home side came from behind to equalise 1-1 thanks to winger Dillan Solomons’ second-half strike. Skhakhane said: “We conceded a silly goal in the first half. But we came back in the second half. “It’s not what we wanted, but the point will help us going forward, in terms of building our confidence. It was my first league game in charge and it gave me time to observe some things. But overall I think we are getting there. It’s a step in the right direction and now we just have to stay focused and collect as many points as we can.” Saturday’s match also saw dribbling sensation Masibusane Zongo make his long-awaited appearance as a substitute. The coach added: “Zongo came on with some good moves and frustrated our opponents. But obviously he hasn’t played in a while and we still need to work on his fitness.” Meanwhile, Highlands Park seem well on their way to promotion to the Absa Premiership after they beat Jomo Cosmos 4-0 away on Sunday. Highlands are nine points clear of Real Kings and 11 ahead of Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhandila (TTM) in the top three with nine matches to go. 