A disturbing video has emerged which shows what appears to be two Pieter­maritzburg policemen bullying and humiliating a gay couple. The video footage, which is doing the rounds on social media, is believed to have been filmed by two police officers who allegedly came across a gay couple engaged in a sexual act in a car at Camps Drift. The video shows the two clearly distressed men with their pants down trying to cover their genitals while the alleged police officers taunt the couple, telling them they may not get dressed. They continue to film the couple, swearing at them and making homophobic statements. “Who told you to get dressed?” one of the men filming can be heard saying. The couple continue to sit in the car, exposed, while the men filming continue to hurl insults at them. While filming, one man asks his partner to take pictures of the couple, then yells at them as they try again to cover up. The couple can be heard apologising before the ‘policeman’ tells them, “It is a shame what you are doing. Men are not supposed to do this”. One of the ‘policemen’ suggests arresting the couple and then tells them to “voetsek” and get dressed. The video then ends. Action for Social Justice International’s Thabiso Mogapi said his Durban activists had identified the couple and would be assisting them with counselling and opening cases. “They are not coping at all,” said Mogapi. “The one man is a teacher and he is now being mocked by his own pupils and colleagues. The other man’s family have disowned him. They did not know he was gay.” He said they were not prepared to be interviewed. Mogapi said the men who were behind the filming of the video, which appears to have been widely distributed on social media, had “ruined and destroyed” lives. He said if the men who filmed the video were police, the issue should go straight to the minister of police. “There are many poor LGTB (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender) people who are treated like this by police everyday and it is not reported.” Pietermaritzburg Gay and Lesbian Network’s Anthony Waldshausen said he was aware of the video and found it to be “despicable” and “upsetting”. “We want to take it further and we are trying to get hold of the couple so we can help them make statements should they want to open a case”. Alexandra police spokesperson Captain Kholeka Mhlongo said she and the station commander had been trying to figure out who the alleged police officers filming the video were since she saw the footage on Wednesday. Mhlongo said although it could not be confirmed that the men filming the video were in fact policemen, if the couple came forward they could open a case and misconduct charges could be opened against the officers. She said that without a case, it would be difficult to investigate as police are mandated to work on incidents that have been reported to the SAPS. She added that if the people filming the video are police members, their behaviour was “unacceptable”. “Police are trained not to discriminate. It is against the law.” She said she found the video demoralising and “difficult and upsetting to watch”. She urged the couple to approach the station commander. It is understood that the traumatised couple underwent counselling on Friday. Decisions on whether to open a case against the police are still pending as the couple are believed to be scared of being identified and victimised further.