A police chase of a suspicious vehicle in Pietermaritzburg on Sunday evening culminated in a shootout between the law enforcers and the suspects. Four were shot and injured by police while a fifth was attacked by a police dog. The chase ended in Elfin Place, Mountain Rise, at about 6.15 pm. Resident Vishay Soni said he was in his room when he heard something that sounded like a firework. He then heard “sporadic” gunfire. His instincts kicked in and he took cover. “I then saw cop cars speed pass,” he said, adding an incident like this had never happened before in the usually quiet suburb. From what he had gathered, suspects in a motor vehicle had allegedly robbed a bakery in Woodlands. They were chased by police and unbeknown to them, they drove into a cul-de-sac. Police were teeming on the street and had cordoned off a section with yellow tape while inquisitive residents and onlookers craned to see what was going on. Ambulances were also present. Police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said that at about 6 pm, on duty members of the K9 unit received a call that there was a suspicious vehicle in Lincoln Road, Woodlands. “One of the passengers had alighted from the vehicle and was armed. He then got back into the vehicle and the vehicle sped off at a high speed. The caller gave a description of the vehicle as being a white Polo.” She added that the registration number was also given. The police responded immediately and saw the vehicle at the intersection of Otto’s Bluff and Dr Chota Motala roads. “The members followed the vehicle and a high-speed chase ensued. The vehicle drove into the Mountain Rise area and eventually into Elfin Place, which is a cul-de- sac. Five suspects alighted from the vehicle, firearms in hand, and started shooting at the police. “Police retaliated. Four suspects have been shot and one was tackled by the police dog and sustained injuries.” Ebrahim continued that four firearms were recovered and the registration plates of the vehicle were found to be false. Police are investigating the case. All the suspects have been arrested. “The response of the police was phenomenal. As a result ... a crime has been foiled and criminals taken off the street once again,” Ebrahim said. She added that at this stage there were no reports of a robbery that had taken place. “Perhaps it was foiled,” she added.