It’s been three years
since Sbonelo Khwela took top honours in the Dusi Canoe Marathon with multiple
winner Andy Birkett in K2 doubles action. Last year, the Shongweni resident
came close to securing his second Dusi title and first K1, finishing second to
Birkett, who will be hunting down a seventh title at this year’s edition of the
race. With less than a week to
go before the three-day event for 2018, Khwela, who will form an exciting
partnership with Siseko Ntondini, says he is ready “and raring” to tackle his
13th race. He will be looking to
capitalise on his good form to try add his second Dusi title to his list of
honours. “The preparations have
gone really well. I think Siseko and I have done everything to prepare for the
race and now we are just making sure we remain fit and ready for the three-day
event,’’ Khwela said. The ambitious duo
confirmed their solid preparations with back-to-back successes at the recent Ozzie
Gladwin Canoe Marathon and Campbell’s to Dusi Bridge Marathon. “To be honest, I can’t
wait for the race. I’m really excited to pair with Siseko. We’re both happy
with our preparations and how we’ve fared in the few seeding races we’ve done
together,” he said. “Our main goal is to
finish in the top three, but obviously it would be the biggest achievement for
us if we were to win the race. “It’s going to be tough. I
was looking at the other guys and it’s going to be gruelling. “We just have to stick to
our plan and keep our eyes on the ball.” Khwela is aware of the
threat that the pairing of Birkett and two-time winner Hank McGregor presents
to their charge for top honours, but feels the Soweto-born paddler Ntondini
will be his lucky charm, given their recent achievements. “Obviously they are the
team to beat. We’re all aware of that. But at the same time it’s a good
challenge. “I respect them because I
know what they are capable of and I’m relishing the pressure and challenge that
comes with it.” However, he expressed
concern about the prize money becoming “too little” over the years. When he won the race with
Birkett in 2014, the prize was R114 000, but it has since been reduced to R50 000. Khwela feels it
discourages athletes, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds. He explained: “I just feel
that the money has become too little now. We used to mostly look forward to the
race because of the money as well, which really helps some of us who come from
disadvantaged backgrounds. “It feels like every year
it’s going down. “It’s not all of us who
have sponsors, there’s very little you can do with R25 000 these
days. “I just wish they can
revisit that decision to accommodate everyone, or we’ll end up playing just for
the love of the sport and not look at it as a career to support our families,”
he said. The 67th edition of the
event takes place from Camps Drift in Pietermaritzburg to Blue Lagoon in Durban
from next Thursday to Saturday. Nondumiso.Zakwe@witness.co.za