A dramatic police chase through the Pietermaritzburg CBD on Tuesday ended in the arrest of two men and the recovery of a hijacked vehicle. Earlier, three men posing as police officers approached a truck driver in Pine Street. The truck driver, who asked not to be named, said the “policemen” told him they were taking him to the police station and then climbed into the truck, with one taking the driver’s seat. The truck driver said he thought everything was fine until the driver sped straight past the Pietermaritzburg police station. “I was shocked. The way they were racing through the CBD after they went past the station had me convinced that I was going to die.” He said he decided his only option was to jump from the moving truck. As the truck neared the Alexandra swimming pool, the terrified man leapt from the cab, ripping his pants and shirt in the process. With abrasions on his elbows and knees, the traumatised man approached an ER24 paramedic and a police officer who had parked their vehicles in Alexandra Park. The paramedic, who asked not to be named, said the man ran up to them and said he had been hijacked. “We tried to get as much detail from him as we could and we [the paramedic and the police officer] began searching for the vehicle.” Tthe Pietermaritzburg Rapid Response Unit found the truck and the suspects in Alexandra Park. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said the suspects saw the police and abandoned the vehicle. He said the Rapid Response Unit gave chase — some on foot, some in their vehicles — through the park and along Peter Kerchhoff Street, before two of the alleged hijackers were apprehended by police. Ngobese said when the suspects were cornered, they produced knives and tried to attack the unit members. However, two warning shots were fired by the police and two men were arrested on the corner of Hoosen Haffejee Street and Troy Street in the CBD. The Pietermaritzburg K9 Unit were looking for the third suspect on Tuesday afternoon. The truck, cash that was stolen from the driver and the knives the suspects had used as weapons were all recovered. The two men who were arrested were taken to the Pietermaritzburg police station and were charged with carjacking. They are expected to appear in court on Wednesday.