The Gold Gang has struck again. Robbers seeking gold jewellery invaded a home in the Allandale area on Wednesday night, in the fourth incident of its kind in the northern areas in a week. Three armed men allegedly forced nine members of a family — including five young children — into a bedroom while they ransacked the house. The modus operandi of the men is the same as that of a gang in three recent robberies where armed men enter unsecured properties and ransack homes, looking for gold and cash. Police said the gang made off with about R4 000 in cash and about R250 000 in goods from the Allandale home. A family member, who asked not to be named, said the incident happened at about 8 pm and the armed assailants came through the front gate, which was left open. “My husband just came from [praying at] the musjid and I met him at the front door and we were looking at something on my phone. Then suddenly two guys with guns came to us. “They made me sit on the floor outside and took my husband inside and made him sit on the couch.” She said there was a third man who had reversed a getaway vehicle into their driveway. “They saw my brother-in-law, who was visiting with his wife and two children, leaving and told him he could not go.” She said the intruders told the entire family to wait in a bedroom while they searched the house. “They asked us for cash and gold … but we didn’t have any gold to give them. “When they were finished searching the house, they put us all in the bathroom and locked the door, then they left. When my husband managed to break the door open, we ran outside and borrowed the neighbour’s phone to call for help.” The woman said the intruders appeared to be professional, and the entire ordeal lasted about 10 minutes. “It all happened so fast and they were very calm. They did their business and they were gone.” She said her family was left traumatised. “I just keep playing the incident over and over again in my head. My eight-year-old is severely traumatised because they’re old enough to know what a gun is, but luckily the other children were too young to know what was happening.” Suneal Beharie, chairperson of Sector 4 community policing forum, said private security officers had spent hours searching for the getaway vehicle. “They [the robbers] had dispersed when we got there. So we travelled all over, to the Table Mountain area, as far as Cato Ridge, we went on the N3 toward Lynnfield Park, up to Copesville and back again.” Beharie assumed the gang operated opportunistically, and probably drove around the northern areas looking for an open front gate. Police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim confirmed the robbery, and said a neighbour had seen a silver VW Polo sedan with NC registration plates fleeing the scene. A silver VW Polo was also used in the other incidents.