Imbali residents have killed a man suspected of criminal activities in the area. Siphamandla Mbhense (20) was apparently stoned to death on Sunday evening and a woman thought to be his accomplice was beaten but survived. The two were allegedly attacked in Unit 14 by people wielding iron rods, bricks and sticks. Their badly beaten bodies were discovered by police on Monday morning. A resident, who asked not to be named, said the two had allegedly stolen handbags and an engagement ring last week. When the woman was spotted in the area on Sunday, she was apprehended and led the residents to where Mbhense was hiding. A resident passing Mbhense’s lifeless body on Monday morning was overheard saying: “Minus one problem. This is what we do to the criminals in this area. Even him, he knew that he was going to die.” The residents said Mbhense’s body lay in the street for over five hours. Plessislaer police spokesperson Captain Musa Ntombela said the incident happened around 8.30 pm on Sunday, but police were only called to the scene on Monday morning. “According to reports, the two were suspected of stealing and they were approached by the community and one of them was killed,” said Ntombela. No arrests have been made yet. Mbhense’s aunt, Nombuso Mbhense, said she was heartbroken. “Yes, he was a troublemaker, but he didn’t deserve to die like this. They should have called the police to come and arrest him,” she said. “We received a call in the morning that Sphamandla had been attacked and he was lying on the side of the road, presumably dead. “When we got here, it was just horrific. I couldn’t recognise him at first. It’s an image I’ll never forget. I couldn’t believe it was him. He lay there like a dog and nobody cared,” added the aunt. Residents told The Witness they were “tired” of reporting crime to police with no arrests being made. Imbali Unit 14 resident Nomalanga Dlamini said criminals were beaten up in her area almost every weekend. “That’s the only way we know justice is done,” said Dlamini. “If we phone the police and lay charges the criminal is freed the next day. “Some of these criminals will only listen and stop after a good beating. Then they know this community is serious and won’t accept crime.”