Posting videos of herself speaking fluent Zulu on social media not only helped a Pietermaritzburg-born youngster get thousands of views and followers, it landed her a role in one of South Africa’s most popular television soapies, Isibaya. Alicia von Locherenberg’s rise to fame came after the 17-year-old started posting videos of herself talking rapidly in Zulu on social media last year. Speaking to Weekend Witness, the Linpark High School Grade 11 pupil said she was approached by Isibaya’s production company and was invited to auditions. “The production company apparently had been keeping an eye on me on social media for a long time. They made contact and I was invited for auditions so they could see if I could act and then we took it from there. “It felt amazing that finally everything was working out for me and that my videos didn’t go unnoticed. It was really unbelievable because I remember when the news came to me I was like wow, is this really happening.” The young social media sensation, who is working on building her online brand through her videos, said being on Isibaya has taught her a lot about the industry she intends venturing into in future. “It was a wonderful experience. I learnt a lot and it opened my eyes to how the industry really works.” Alicia said despite the fame and recognition she is receiving, her main priority is focusing on school. “School is a priority for me right now but I also love making my videos so I try to keep a balance between the two.” She said her parents were overwhelmed when she started being in the spotlight but are slowly adjusting and warming up to the idea of what she does. “They have been watching my videos, are seeing newspaper article after newspaper article and some people even approach them to compliment their Zulu-speaking daughter,” laughed Alicia. She said she doubts that she would have gained so much media attention if she did not speak Zulu. “If I came into the industry as a normal English-speaking white girl I don’t think I would have received the same reception I have been getting, but the fact that I am ugqonqga okhuluma isiZulu [a white person speaking Zulu] has definitely got me to where I am today. “It is important for everyone to learn another language whatever race you are because as South Africans we need to be united and be able to communicate with each other easily,” she said. The youngster said people have not seen the last of her on their small smartphone screens as she will continue posting her videos. And as for their bigger screens, she will be appearing on Isibaya again.