Robbers targeting precious jewellery in the Orient Heights area have struck again. The brazen armed robbers who terrorised two families last week held up another family at gunpoint on Tuesday night. They are suspected to be part of a syndicate operating in the area targeting precious jewellery. Three occupants at a property on Executive Drive, who were the recent victims, were left traumatised after the ordeal. Property owner Keshnee Soorju said she was with her 34-year-old son, Meeshal, and a relative when the robbers accosted them. “I had just unlocked the front burglar gate for our relative. When he came in, he latched the burglar gate and I was going to lock it after I had set the table for supper,” said Soorju. She said within minutes she heard the burglar gate open and she saw shock on the face of her son, who was seated next to the door. “The expression on my son’s face said it all. I just knew that it was robbers. There was no chance to do anything. They walked in and they all had guns.” She said one of the three unmasked men pointed the barrel of a gun just inches away from her son and said: “This is going to be quick. You don’t need to be scared. Give us what we want and you won’t be harmed.” Soorju said she had just returned from work and had placed cash, cellphones, her handbag and car keys on the lounge table. “They emptied my bag and took all the cash. The other one went straight to my son and snatched my phone from him. One of them also pulled the chain I had around my neck. He told me he wants more rings.” The robbers then ordered the two men to lie down on the floor and one of them tried to force Soorju to go into one of the bedrooms, but she resisted. When she refused, they locked all of them into one of the bedrooms. “I was very afraid to go into the room with him. The rooms were dark because we are having problems with our electricity and had to isolate the power on that side of the house. He pulled me and got angry. He pushed me so violently I fell and strained my neck.” The robbers, who kept asking for “gold”, managed to escape with three television sets, four cellphones, jewellery and a Mercedes-Benz. The vehicle was later found abandoned in the Swayimani area near Wartburg. “They got away with some very expensive items, such as custom-made jewellery and my watches. I cannot really put a cash value on what was taken.” Although no one was harmed during the robbery, Soorju said that they were still rattled. “These guys knew exactly what they were doing and what they were looking for. They ransacked our cupboards but thank God they did not harm us. “I am still shaken and struggling to come to terms with what happened. It was like a movie. I kept thinking I must be dreaming. It was such a traumatic experience and I don’t wish it on anybody.” She praised the local neighbourhood watch that raised the alarm about the robbery and alerted the police. Suneal Behare, who is part of the Sector Four Community Watch, said: “When they were pushed into the bedroom the son still had his phone in his pocket. He alerted his girlfriend, who then put a message out on the Whats­App group.” Behare said as they drove into the property, they saw the robbers fleeing in a silver VW Polo Sedan. He said the vehicle had earlier been seen by residents scouting the area. The description of the vehicle matched the one involved in the previous robberies, he said. Mountain Rise police confirmed that they are investigating a case of armed robbery. No arrests have been made yet.