To win the gruelling K2 FNB Dusi Canoe Marathon, you don’t just need an expert paddling partner, but someone who understands you. The Peek sisters, Jordan and Cana, can attest to that. On Saturday, the Pietermaritzburg sisters were crowned the 2018 champions of the Dusi in the women’s category at the Blue Lagoon in Durban. Jordan (23) and Cana (20) won all three stages of the race on their way to claim their first title in the competition. The two comfortably defeated Bridgette Hartley and partner Christie Mackenzie, who finished second, and the third place pair of Jenna Ward and Vanda Kiszli. “It’s a great feeling to win the Dusi. It hasn’t really sunk in that we are the Dusi champions in the women’s race. It’s so unreal and I can’t even explain the feeling,” said Jordan after crossing the finish line. Even though Jordan, who completed her eighth Dusi, and her sister were among the pre-race favourites to clinch the title, the older sister said they never believed they could bring the gold medal home. “We didn’t think we were going to win it. We just said we would train hard, work hard and try hard on the river. On the second day we saw that we were still leading and we decided that we had better work hard on the third day to keep our lead,” said Jordan. Cana said it was a priceless feeling to go through everything with Jordan and the experience has strengthened their bond. “This was our first win, the first time we thought it was possible to win and the first time we paddled together, so yes, it was great to have all these first times with my sister. Just to go through all that experience, the training and the race with a family member, was just unreal,” said Cana. “We have gone through hard times and with a sister you are absolutely blunt and honest. You shout at each other and you have to be tough. “I think it definitely brought us together and all the memories that we have had we wouldn’t change for the world.” In 2015, Cana, who is also committed to road running, finished second in the Dusi K1, while her sister finished fourth, and those were their personal bests before this year’s edition. They have represented South Africa in the Canoe Marathon World Championships. “There were a couple of swear words in the boat. Cana is the one that always swears, but at home she is like the most chilled person you can find. Some mood swings you have to deal with here and there, but she is a good sister. I wouldn’t change her for the world,” said Jordan. Meanwhile, Lorna Olivier became the first woman to complete 30 consecutive Dusi Marathons while Lyle Wheeler earned his 47th medal in the race, the most medals of any paddler.