As maladministration threatens to bring service delivery to a halt in the Msunduzi Municipality, former mayor Mike Tarr has added his voice to mounting calls for the council to be dissolved. In an open letter to the municipality’s leadership, Tarr said putting the council into administration was the only way to address the current challenges faced by the municipality. “... The best solution would be for the provincial legislature with the agreement of National Council of Provinces (NCOP) to dissolve council, place it under administration and have fresh elections. “This would affect many good and able councillors from all parties, but is the only way to start fresh and get rid of the rot,” he said. Corrupt councillors in collusion with dodgy contractors have been accused of rendering the municipality dysfunctional. The dissolution of the council, Tarr said, will present ratepayers with an opportunity to get rid of corrupt councillors. “Hopefully we would get a fresh batch of councillors with the integrity and ability to realise the potential of our wonderful city for the benefit of all. “The MEC should act while she has time — and there is precious little left — to expect the current incumbents to rectify the situation is to live in dreamland,” Tarr said. The former mayor called on Cogta MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube to view renewed efforts at getting rid of corruption across all spheres of government, as an opportunity to mount a clean-up operation in Msunduzi. “Does she realise what damage this is causing the ANC? Surely the time has come to ride on the wave of euphoria with the advent of President Ramaphosa and clean up our act in Msunduzi,” he said. The auditor-general recently slapped the Msunduzi Municipality with a disclaimer report, the harshest opinion against any government entity. Tarr said the situation in which the Msunduzi Municipality currently finds itself, could be traced back to a series of controversial decisions the current council leadership had made. According to Tarr, the removal of former Mayor Chris Ndlela, former municipal manager Mxolisi Nkosi and former speaker Baboo Baijoo, had a major contribution to the situation in which the Msunduzi Municipality currently finds itself. Tarr also questioned the municipal leadership’s decision to appoint Sizwe Hadebe as municipal manager despite question marks around the top official’s qualification and employment background. “The MEC will be aware of the memorandum drawn up by senior managers in the municipality that outlines a range of serious concerns about the municipal manager. “At the very least an independent investigation should be undertaken to address the concerns raised by senior managers. “If the MEC is serious about addressing the problems in Msunduzi she should take immediate action,” he said. Tarr’s call for the municipality to be dissolved has been echoed by opposition parties and labour federation Cosatu. Cogta spokesperson Lennox Mabaso could not be reached for comment. However, the KwaZulu-Natal Premier’s Department said Premier Willies Mchunu will meet the Cosatu provincial leadership next week to brief them about steps that the provincial government would be taking to stabilise the situation at the municipality.