Scottsville residents are up in arms over a house in the area from which they suspect a brothel is being run. Residents have rebelled against apparent illegal goings-on at the property since Saturday. At the weekend people from neighbouring properties “camped” outside the house and demanded to meet with the tenant. On Monday night the situation reached boiling point with some residents telling The Witness that there was allegedly a fracas in the street. Several residents had reported seeing “very young girls scantily dressed” entering the house, and, thereafter some of the locals confronted a man in the street who they believed to be a patron. Police were called to the scene. The residents also said they regularly see people loitering outside in the quiet, residential road. On Wednesday the property owner, Paul James, told The Witness that he has served an eviction notice on the current tenant. James said this was after he was alerted to the residents’ unhappiness at the weekend. “They want the tenant out immediately, so we managed to get SAPS to come out to the property on Saturday. I want to follow the proper legal procedure and I can’t just kick him out.” He said the tenant had moved in on February 1, and had signed a three-month lease. “On Monday a magistrate told us we could either report it to municipal building inspectors, get an eviction notice, or lay a charge of intimidation or whatever the tenants may have done.” James said he drew up an eviction notice at Alexandra Road police station and served it on the tenant on Monday. In terms of it, the tenant has seven days to leave the property, but has asked James for some time to find a new dwelling. “I understand why the community is upset, but I would like to do things legally. If he is running a brothel or doing illegal things I would agree that he should be out,” he said. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said SAPS were investigating residents’ claims, and said they had met with the community on Monday. He said no cases have been opened in connection with the allegations.