Young Maritzburg United talent Siphesihle Ndlovu said he is
flattered by interest from some of the big guns in the Absa Premiership but
insisted he is happy at his hometown club. The 21-year-old versatile player has consolidated his
reputation since joining the club’s senior team in 2016 as one of the Absa
Premiership’s best midfielders, putting in a number of impressive displays for
both club and country. “It’s flattering to see things like that and can only mean
you’re playing well. But my objective since I started here was to grow as a
player and a person. “I feel settled and my family is very happy. Right now my
only objective is to continue with Maritzburg,” said Ndlovu. The prodigy from KwaMpumuza in Pietermaritzburg, who won the
Young Player of the Season and Midfielder of the Season awards at the 2017/18
PSL Awards ceremony, said that he had noted reports linking him with a move
away from the club and has discussed that with his coach Fadlu Davids. While he admitted that he has been flattered by the alleged
interest from the likes of Orlando Pirates and Bidvest Wits, he made it clear
that he remained focused on the Team of Choice and will not allow such talk to
“distract” him. “There will always be rumours and speculations but I just
have to treat it as that. “The coach has always been reminding us to control our
thinking and not let anything being reported in the media affect us in any
way.” When asked if there had been teams trying to lure him, the
exciting young talent refused to be drawn into speculation, saying at this
stage he will only consider offers from abroad. “As a player you have to be mature enough to take that step
because a lot could go wrong if you rush such things. I don’t think I am ready
yet to leave for another club, especially from South Africa. I still need to
prove myself here, be the best player, midfielder.” On their plans for the coming campaign, Ndlovu said: “The
team had a great season last term but it is time now to set new targets and I
know there are a lot of things we need to work on. “I know a lot of people are going to be watching us.” Meanwhile, the prolific player said his success in South
African football is down to a combination of him being at his peak and the
Midlands club’s style of play. He believes that his recent participation in the Bafana
Bafana camp will come in handy for the “Men in Blue”. “It’s obviously a privilege and honour for any player to
play for the national team. As a child I always dreamt about it but I did not
think it would happen so soon. I still pinch myself to check if I am not
dreaming. “It’s all God’s plan and I hope that I can continue to learn
from my experienced team-mates and grow as a player. In his second season as a professional player, Ndlovu made
34 appearances in all competitions, scoring five goals for the local club that
finished fourth in the league and got into two Cup finals, for the first time
in its history. Now, as The Witness reported on Monday, the local club are
understood to be on the verge of adding two new midfielders to their squad in
Keagan Buchanan and Justice Figuareido from Swaziland.