After spending a night in a cold and mucky jail cell, a
Scottsville resident who was arrested in the midst of this week’s national Fuel
Prices Must Fall protest has emerged defiant, insisting that motorists must
fight on against unaffordable fuel hikes. Read: Nine arrested for blocking N3 Ilse Knott (41), chief operating officer at One Life Foundation,
told Weekend Witness on Friday of her anguish at spending the night in a prison
cell. Knott said she was treated like a criminal for fighting for
what she believed was right. “I had done nothing criminal. I think they could
have done things differently and just ask us to remove the vehicles. We would
have moved.” Knott, who works with disadvantaged communities in
Pietermaritzburg, said she took part considering the plight of the poor. “I
work predominantly in France, Jika Joe and Sweetwaters. I have seen what the
fuel price is doing to them, that is why this campaign is very close to my
heart.” Knott and nine other people were released on Thursday due to
insufficient evidence. The 10 were supposed to appear in the Pietermaritzburg
Magistrate’s Court, but the matter was not placed on the court roll. On her experience of being imprisoned for over 24 hours
pending her court appearance, she told Weekend Witness: “If our criminal system
treats people like animals, they will always stay criminals, but if we show
them respect and dignity, they will have self-respect and then we give them a
sliver of hope to choose a life without crime.” Despite the seriousness of the allegations that were put
against her and the nine other people, Knott is insistent they did not cause
any public violence. She claims that when she joined the campaign’s
Pietermaritzburg WhatsApp group, it all seemed legit and there was an assurance
it was not going to be violent or illegal. She said that initially, she was
never supposed to be at the forefront of the protest. “There were trucks in
front of us but suddenly they moved and my car was in the front. I wasn’t happy
about it but I couldn’t move.” The mother of four said half an hour after she arrived on
the highway, a senior police official arrived “throwing his toys out of the
cot”. One of the RTI officers warned them that the general on scene may “deploy
teargas”. “When he said that, I went straight to my car and I was
ready to go but I was blocked in.” She said the place was hurriedly swamped with police
officers who were armed with R5s and bullet-proof vests. “They [police] walked around a few cars in the front and the
next minute started arresting people.” “I sat in my car and I was busy drinking coffee. I had just
finished my coffee when I heard a knock on my window.” She said the police officer told her to get out. “I asked
what the charge is, and he just shouted ‘Get out you’re being arrested’. I got
out peacefully and I was escorted to where the other people were lying and I
was instructed to lie down on my stomach.” A visibly shaken Knott said she laid on the cold tar road
for half an hour. “I was petrified. We were lying on the side of the road and
heavy vehicles were just passing by. “I thought I was going to die.” She said she was then taken to the Pieter­maritzburg Central
police station holding cell. “I kept asking them what’s the charge but no one
could tell me. Eventually after 1 pm, the charge came through and it was a
shocker.” Describing the experience she said it was “excruciating”. “I’m still shaking from prison. The holding cell was so
small and disgusting. I think if the SPCA finds a dog in those conditions it
will be all over the news.” She said the holding cell had blood, faeces and urine
everywhere. “The basin was blocked with vomit.” She said when she received her lunch, she only drank the
juice. “It was extremely sweet but I was thirsty and I had to drink it. The
food was horrific. It tasted terrible and it smelled terrible and it was
unappetising. I couldn’t sleep because of the urine stench. It was horrific.” Knott said through her attorney, she intends to take legal
action against the state. 