There are nosy ones. Noisy ones whose techno tunes
constantly blare from their sound systems. Messy ones who leave refuse bags in
front of your gate, even ones with terrifying Rottweilers who bark incessantly.
The list goes on. What should you do if you find yourself in a situation where
the Dlaminis are the pits? Chief executive officer and regional director of RE/MAX
Southern Africa Adrian Goslett advised that, although your initial response may
be to call the police, this is not always the best way to manage disruptions
with your neighbours. “Resolving neighbour disputes can be a lengthy and
time-consuming process if you have to take it up with authorities so you want
to try your best to resolve it without getting others involved, if possible,”
said Goslett. According to his advice, the first step in any dispute
between neighbours is to take a human approach to the situation by trying to
resolve the issue neighbour-to-neighbour. “In many cases, the issue can be easily resolved if both
neighbours just have an honest and respectful conversation about the issue —
the operative word here being respectful,” he said. He warned that it was never a good idea to confront a
neighbour while you are still angry. “So many disputes continue for longer than necessary simply
because a neighbour has allowed their frustration to seep into the interaction,
which only further fuelled the offending neighbour to continue their bad
behaviour out of spite,” said Goslett. Japie Kruger, an associate at Phatshoane Henney Attorneys,
warned that, when dealing with noise nuisance, you should not take the law into
your own hands. “Keep in mind that, should you decide to approach a court of
law, it must be done with so called ‘clean hands’ in order to be successful.
That is why you have to refrain from any actions that might be used against
you,” said Kruger. Commenting on The Witness Facebook page, Rikesh Ishwarlall
said his neighbours burn rubbish in their yard, especially when there is
washing on the line. “I don’t understand why they can’t take out their refuse
like everyone else. Unfortunately, common sense is not as common as one may
think,” he said. Another local, Michele Greatwood, said her issue was with
neighbours who can’t be bothered to keep their gardens and verges neat. Sue Green said: “I have a neighbour who thinks that he can
erect a two storey building over the building line without planning permission
— cutting off sunshine and completely eroding our privacy. We have been to the
municipality and have had no joy.” Rashika Goorcharran said he had a problem with the
neighbour’s dogs barking incessantly. “I sent him [neighbour] a decent message to move the dogs to
another place because they are kept about two metres from our bedrooms. “The entire family stopped talking to us after that message
and the dogs were never moved.” Goorcharran said, after his landlady laid a complaint with
the municipality, the neighbour was instructed to move the dogs. In 2016, Msunduzi Municipality took a Blackridge resident to
court for allegedly failing to comply with a notice served to him about his
noisy generator. According to neighbours, the man’s generator had been
running “at all hours” since December 2015. The city’s by-laws state that, “noise nuisance means any
sound which disturbs or impairs or may disturb or impair the convenience or
peace of any person”. A disturbing noise means a noise level which exceeds the
zone sound level and, if no zone sound level has been designated, seven
decibels is the maximum accepted level of sound. In the Bisley area, fed-up homeowners Sabelo and Sibongile
Zitha took their neighbour Siphesihle Ngobese to the Pietermaritzburg high
court in a bid to stop noisy parties at his house. The Zitha’s told the court at the time that they had tried
everything to resolve the matter amicably however all their attempts had
failed. Msunduzi municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said
that generally, on receipt of complaints of this nature, an environmental
health practitioner would investigate the complaint and serve a compliance
notice of the alleged noise nuisance on the party concerned. “On non-compliance of the notice, the report and affidavits
received will then be forwarded to the municipality’s legal unit for
consideration of further legal proceedings,” Mafumbatha said. Mafumbatha also added that, while affidavit statements are
required from complainants, noise readings will be taken to establish how much
the noise has exceeded the accepted level of sound. Currently, fines issued are for amounts of R 1 500 or
R 2 500, or both, depending on the legislation used. Nontuthuko Mdunge said her neighbours had three tiny dogs
who are let out every morning at about 6 am and then “they start barking and
whimpering to no end”. “I only start work at about 10 am, but these dogs wake me at
around 6 am all the time. One morning I went over there and threatened to
seriously harm their dogs,” she told Weekend Witness. Pietermaritzburg SPCA senior inspector Alec Wylie said the
correct protocol to follow for stray animals is to phone the local pound
master. “No person except for an officer of the law may destroy an
animal. If you see an animal strolling around and not causing problems, call
the pound master,” he said. He said matters relating to “nuisance behaviour” fall under
local by-laws. “This includes causing a disturbance by howling, barking or
whining as well as dogs (and increasingly, cats) wandering off or being allowed
to stray beyond their own properties. “Generally speaking, by-laws are enforced by municipalities
or duly appointed sub-contractors,” he said. The general by-laws also state: “No person shall turn loose
or allow to wander in any street or public place, any horse, cattle, donkey,
pig, sheep, pig, goat, and any such animal so found, may be impounded.” Jason Smith from Eastwood complained about his neighbours
who often had wild parties and played loud music until the early hours of the
morning. But he admitted that when he asked his neighbours to keep it down,
they generally obliged. Nomthandazo Sithole said her neighbours’ hymns were really
disturbing: “I am not religious and she keeps playing gospel music early in the
morning and late at night. I have spoken to her several times but she refuses
to stop.” Mafumbatha said the noise and nuisance by-laws state that if
someone’s music could be heard outside the boundaries of their premises, they
were contravening the law. “If notified of a complaint, law enforcement officials will
investigate and see how serious the situation is. “If necessary, they instruct people to turn down their music
and, if the offenders do not comply, they can be fined. In extreme cases, their
equipment will be confiscated,” she added. Sharlin Moodley said her neighbour hates pets. “He puts threatening letters in our postboxes that say: ‘if
your dog comes out of your yard and into mine I will kill it’. A couple of us
have had our dogs poisoned or their throats slit but we have no solid evidence.
He is a cruel man.” Other ‘Maritzburger’s complained that their neighbours spied
on them or dumped rubble in front in their driveways. Trees which overlapped from one neighbour’s yard to the
next, leaving a leafy mess, were also a popular complaint from those
interviewed. But Mafumbatha said these situations were not covered by the
by-laws as they were civil matters which had to be settled between the respective
parties. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi
Ngobese said the public was welcome to report any noise disturbances to the
police after 10 pm. Ngobese said if noise makers did not comply with the by-laws
they could be charged for disturbance. “With regards to dogs, we do the same, failing which we
inform the SPCA to deal with the matter,” said Ngobese.