National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) regional secretary Zimasile Giyama is doing his best to get out of apologising to an SPCA manager for allegedly calling her a “white racist b**ch”. On Thursday he brought an application to the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court for a judgment granted against him, favouring SPCA manager Ronnie Yeoman, to be rescinded. In the April ruling, Equality Court magistrate Kgomotso Kgayile ordered that if Giyama fails to apologise, he must pay a R50 000 fine. Read: Unionist fined for racism on Thursday, magistrate Steven Collins adjourned Giyama’s application to a date to be arranged because the proper procedures were not followed in bringing it. In his affidavit, Giyama said that the judgment should be scrapped because it only came to his attention on April 19 — the day it was granted. He said he did not receive notice to appear in court timeously. When he arrived at court, judgment had already been granted. Giyama added that on November 17 last year, he and Yeoman exchanged some words that were not racist or hate speech in nature. “I told her to go to hell with her dogs. After the meeting she tried to block my way. It was at this moment that another exchange of words ensued and I called her a disgusting nostalgic old racist.” He denies calling her a “white racist b**ch”. Giyama added that he was at the SPCA that day to meet with staff members who said “non-white staff are treated poorly” to the extent that the animals at the SPCA are treated better. He said Yeoman tried to disrupt the meeting. In her replying affidavit, Yeoman said that Giyama used “hateful speech” towards her that day. She previously told the court that the meeting was held between SPCA employees and representatives of Nehawu, which she’d assumed was about wage negotiations. It was supposed to run from 10 am to 11 am. At around 11.20 am, she said she received a call about an injured dog. Because all the employees were still in the meeting, Yeoman decided to put her head into the room where it was happening to ask if anyone could attend to the emergency. Giyama, whose name she did not know at the time, told her she was rude and “to go to hell and take your dogs with you”. She said that after the meeting she asked him for his name and he responded by saying: “F**k you, you white racist b**ch”. Of the judgment, she said that Giyama was at court on that day but chose not to enter the courtroom. 