Another ANC regional structure in the troubled Moses Mabhida region has been stripped of its powers. The ANC Youth League (ANCYL) provincial leadership has sent a delegation to oversee preparations for the regional conference after clipping the wings of the regional leadership. The regional leadership of the mother­­­ body was also disbanded last month and a task team was appointed. The ANC in the region is still divided between those who support President Cyril Ramaphosa and those who support former president Jacob Zuma. The decision to strip the league of its powers was described as a blow to those who support Zuma. An ANCYL member who asked not to be named said supporters of Zuma had used the ANCYL to campaign for him. “That is why they have made sure that the ANCYL does not hold its regional conference before the mother body can hold its regional conference. The ANCYL regional conference was supposed to have been held a long time ago but as we speak now, there is no date set for the conference. Their term of office expired a long time ago,” he said. ANCYL provincial spokesperson Mandla Shange said they had decided to send an intervention team after receiving numerous complaints about membership gatekeeping and divisions in the regional leadership. “Many branches had complained of being suppressed by the regional leadership, saying their membership forms had not been accepted during a national recruitment drive which ended on June 30. After investigating these complaints, we indeed found that there was a high degree of gatekeeping in the region. “There were also complaints that certain branches had been disbanded without any valid reason. When we met with the leadership from the region, many in the regional leadership said they did not know anything about the disbandment of those branches. “It became clear that the regional leadership is divided and we took a decision to handle all matters that relate to administration in the region,” he said. Regional secretary Thembinkosi “Guerrilla” Zondi, confirmed about the decision to send an intervention team. Zondi said the regional conference had been delayed many activities in the motherbody, including court challenges.