With the ANC struggling to put in place a proper leadership
structure in KZN, Nkosentsha Shezi has become the face of radical organisations
seeking to fill the leadership vacuum created by party infighting. “The ANC national executive
committee [NEC] should rescind its decision to withdraw support for former
president Jacob Zuma if it wants to be still in power in this province after
next year’s general elections,” he said. Shezi (42), who runs a funeral
parlour business, is the chairperson of the Radical Economic Transformation
(RET) Champion — an umbrella organisation that includes civil society groups
such as Durban’s Delangokubona Business Forum and the National Funeral
Practitioners Association of SA (Nafupa SA). With ANC provincial leaders
supporting Zuma unable to openly back the former president out of fear of a
backlash from the party’s national top brass, Shezi and leaders of
organisations affiliated to RET Champion have been criss-crossing the province
to drum up support for Zuma. “He was removed from office and
even now when he is no longer the president he is still being humiliated. We
have no doubt in our minds that the only reason Zuma is being persecuted is
because he supports RET,” Shezi said. A former ANC Youth League
(ANCYL) branch secretary in Kwadabeka near Pinetown, Shezi believes the current
ANC top brass led by President Cyril Ramaphosa have abandoned RET to appease
investors. “The fact of the matter is that
under the current leadership government policy is controlled by Western
forces,” he said. Leaders of the organisations
affiliated to RET Champion, who have been raising funds and mobilising public
support for Zuma during his court appearances, are also rooting for Zulu King
Goodwill Zwelithini in his battle against those calling for the dissolution of
the Ingonyama Trust. Shezi, who was one of the guest
speakers at Zwelithini’s recent land imbizo held in Ulundi, wants land in the
entire province, not only in rural areas, to be put under the control of
traditional leaders. “When colonialists took our
land by force they took it from the traditional leaders, who are the ones that
have always taken care of land on behalf of the Zulu people. So, it makes
perfect sense to take back the stolen land and return it to the traditional
leaders. “All the land‚ from Port
Shepstone to the Drakensberg, should be returned to the king‚” he added. Shezi, who hails from KwaMashu,
north of Durban, said his organisation would opt to back a rival political
party in next year’s polls only if the ANC failed to act on the civil
movement’s demands around Zuma and land. “If the ANC does the right
thing then there won’t be a need to talk about an alternative political party.” 