A toddler’s safe return home on Friday morning was deemed a
“miracle” by rescue workers. The two-year-old Bergville girl was found alive after
spending two nights in the Bergville mountains in sub zero temperatures,
wearing only a thin T-shirt and a pair of pants. The little girl went missing from outside a family friend’s
home in Bergville on Wednesday afternoon sparking a frantic search. By Thursday morning, the toddler’s family and members of the
community were in a panic, fearing the worst after an icy cold night with
temperatures sinking to -3° Celsius. Members of the Pietermaritzburg, Okhahlamba and Ladysmith K9
Search and Rescue Units were called out on Thursday morning and searched until
10 pm that evening before calling it a night. An officer at the scene said they called off the search that
night due to the uneven terrain and because it was too dark to see anything. But early Friday the search and rescue team members returned
to the area to resume the desperate search, in the hope that against all odds
the little girl may be found alive. Their prayers were answered. “We had been looking for around an hour and we were walking
up one of the mountains near the family house when one of the other search
teams heard a child crying,” said the source. “We all went up, and there she
was, near the top of the mountain.” The source said the little girl was “freezing cold” but
otherwise seemed unharmed. “It’s nothing short of a miracle”, he said. Ladysmith journalist, Claudine Senekal, said she was so
touched that she had “cried with joy” when she saw one of the police officers
carrying the little girl down the mountain — alive. “There have been to so many scenes that have ended in tears
and heartbreak. I had a cry when I saw she was safe because there is almost
never a happy ending to these sorts of stories,” she added. In an emotional reunion with her daughter, the little girl’s
mother wrapped her arms around her daughter in a warm bear hug the moment
police placed her in her arms. Senekal said it was a happy day for everyone who had been
involved in the search as the little girl was found alive. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani
Zwane said however a case of child neglect will be opened for investigation by
Bergville police. He added that the child was taken to a nearby hospital for
medical attention and check-up after her ordeal. The names of the child and her mother were withheld at the
request of police. 