The family of the KwaXimba woman who was shot dead by her builder at her home at the weekend are still in the dark as to why she was killed. According to the KwaZulu-Natal Health Department, Cacisile Gumede (34), who worked as a data capturer at the Msunduzi Clinic in Cato Ridge, was shot dead by her builder, Sdu Sitole, who was filmed later putting a gun to his head and pulling the trigger. Sitole’s suicide was captured on video, which was then widely circulated on social media. “Sitole had for some time been building a house for the now-deceased but there are scant details as to what could have led to the shooting,” the Health Department said. On Wednesday, Health MEC Sibongiseni Dhlomo, together with community leaders, visited the Gumede family to express their condolences. Speaking to the family, Dhlomo said Gumede’s death was a huge loss. “The department has had several incidents of similar unexpected and sudden deaths that have left us shocked. “As the chairman of the Men’s Forum in KZN, I want to encourage men to protect women instead of killing and abusing them in this manner,” said Dhlomo. KwaXimba ward councillor Musa Mkhize said he had known Gumede for 15 years as she was very hands on and involved in political and community matters. Mkhize said: “We are still confused as to what exactly happened but to our knowledge Cacisile did not owe the builder any money. “He [Sitole] came into her home and she gave him all the money owed to him in cash. He shot her and threw the money on top of her body, then left,” said Mkhize. Gebisile Gumede, Gumede’s mother, said they were grateful for Dhlomo’s visit as it showed what kind of person her daughter was. “She loved beautiful things, she was a hard worker but had a temper especially if things weren’t done right. “We are not entirely sure why she was killed but her death is a great loss for us as she was the one who always initiated good things in this family,” she said. Gumede is survived by her two children, aged 12 and seven. She was with her sister and one of her colleagues at the time of the murder. She will be laid to rest at her home in KwaXimba on Sunday morning.