A Northdale man says he is so traumatised after armed robbers chopped off part of his left hand he cannot bear to look to see how much of his hand was cut off. Police said in a report that the attackers “cut off a finger”. Speaking by phone from his hospital bed on Thursday while awaiting surgery, the 45-year-old father and businessman said he is just happy to be alive. He agreed to tell his story on condition his name not be published as he fears for his safety and that of his family. The man said he was at home listening to music in his garage at around 7.30 pm on Wednesday when he was confronted by two men wearing balaclavas, gloves and armed with a panga. They ordered him to get into his Nissan Qashqai with them and drive away. “I got into the car and drove off without putting up a fight because I was thinking about the safety of my wife, young daughter and our maid, who were all in the house.” As he drove up Old Greytown Road he said one of the men called someone and instructed them to wait at the top of the road. “While driving my phone rang, I think it was my daughter calling to check where I was, but the man sitting next to me snatched the phone out of my hand,” he said. He said he prayed throughout his ordeal and believes this is what ultimately helped him find the strength and courage to escape. The assailants ordered him to stop at the top of Old Greytown Road in a isolated area. The man said after stopping he took the ignition keys, opened the door and threw the keys into the bushes nearby before fleeing. His escape bid was foiled, however, when he was grabbed by one of the attackers who had been sitting in the back seat. Punishment for trying to run was swift. “He held my left hand against the body of the car and I felt the blade of a knife on my hand. Luckily the man was not that big so I managed to push him off and ran. I was already bleeding heavily,” he said. “I ran without looking back. I was running in between the bushes because I was scared they might try to follow me,” he said. The man ran until he eventually got to a house and knocked on the door for help. He is grateful to the stranger who answered and helped get him to hospital, he said. The man was due to undergo surgery on his hand yesterday afternoon. “I don’t even know how badly my hand is injured or how many fingers were chopped off. I’ve just been too traumatised to even look at my hand,” he said. The man said his family are still very shaken up but are coping. He advised everyone to be extra vigilant about their surroundings, even when at home. Provincial police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said the man’s car was later found burnt on Old Greytown Road. “Charges of carjacking and assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm are being investigated by Mountain Rise police, no arrests have been made yet,” said Gwala.