While the owner of the Prestbury pet cat that was shot and
killed with an air rifle intends laying criminal charges against the alleged
shooter today, the man and his wife are drafting court papers for harassment. The man accused of shooting the cat has been named in posts
on social media. A Facebook user started a petition to boycott the man’s
business. A relative of the man, who asked not to be named, told The
Witness on Monday that the family feel the matter has been “blown so out
of proportion”. Also read: ‘Prestbury menace shot my cat’ The relative said it started with the cat “and then it was
the monkey and now everyone is saying he pulled guns on them”. She added that there have been “some very serious and
inflammatory accusations” made, such as the man being called a racist on social
media. She said that it is “very stressful”. The family said they will be taking legal action, and laying
harassment charges. Neither she nor the man accused of shooting the cat would
comment on whether he in fact did shoot the animal. “We don’t want to fight. We
don’t want to fight with the neighbours. We want to just put this to rest and
move on,” said the relative. Pietermaritzburg attorney Anand Pillay confirmed on Monday
that he has consulted with the man and his wife and that he is busy drafting
court papers. He was unable to say when the matter would go to court. Meanwhile, the owner of the dead cat, Barbara Still, on Monday
told The Witness that she, too, has seen an attorney and will be
laying charges of cruelty to animals and illegal discharge of a firearm in an
urban area against the man responsible for shooting Bagheera, the cat. Still was devastated following the incident. The Witness last week attended a community meeting she
had called after finding her cat dead in a neighbouring yard and confirming
that he died as a result of being shot with an air rifle. An autopsy stated
that the cat would not have been able to move more than a few inches after
being shot and would have died a painful death. At the meeting the man was confronted with allegations by
local residents that he had a “threatening history” in the neighbourhood. Residents raised complaints that he had allegedly threatened
other pets and had shot and killed monkeys in neighbouring gardens with an air
rifle.