A brave Kranskop shop owner was able to fend off 17 armed robbers, killing two of them, when they attempted to rob his butchery on Saturday afternoon. The men entered the Kranskop shop at around 5.30 pm and held up the owner. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said reports indicated that all 17 men were heavily armed and some escaped with an undisclosed amount of cash. A relative of the owner, who would not be named, said a gun battle ensued. “There were 17 men. It was just raining bullets. There were about 60 to 100 bullet casings inside and around the store,” said the relative. While the robbers and the shop owner exchanged fire, the owner managed to shoot and kill two of the criminals. The robbers also allegedly shot a bystander who was rushed to hospital. Police could not give information on the bystander’s condition at the time of going to press. The owner’s relative said before there was an exchange of gunfire, the robbers pistol-whipped and kicked the shop owner, but this claim could not be confirmed by police. “He [the owner] is doing okay,” said the relative. “It is really sad what happened here. Money is another issue. The community in the area is like our family. These men were outsiders. “There was one shot that landed on the floor just before his [the owner’s] feet. It just missed him.” The relative said the owner was still traumatised from Saturday’s ordeal. Zwane confirmed that two unlicensed firearms were recovered from the dead robbers, while the other men were able to flee the scene with an undisclosed amount of money in two getaway vehicles. “A case of armed robbery, attempted murder and possession of unlicensed firearms and ammunition was opened at Kranskop police station for further investigation,” said Zwane. “A case of inquest was also opened regarding the death of the two robbers.” Both men appeared to be in their thirties but have not yet been identified. “Kranskop police assisted by neighbouring police stations are still searching for the outstanding suspects,” said Zwane.