Boughton businessman Darryl Moss has filed court papers against the woman who has accused him of shooting her cat. Moss filed papers with the harassment court in Pietermaritzburg on Wednesday, accusing Barbara Still of taking to the media and social media “in order to tarnish” his name and reputation. No order had been granted by late Wednesday afternoon. Also read: ‘Prestbury menace shot my cat’ In an affidavit, Moss said it was “possible someone else shot the cat”. “Many people in our neighbourhood have shot at monkeys before and it [was] unfair for the respondent [Still] to assume that I perpetrated the act merely because the cat was found dead in my yard. “I am now constantly living in fear as the behaviour of the respondent has caused the community to lash out at me and threaten me for actions that were not perpetrated by me.” Moss is asking the court to grant a protection from harassment order in his favour against Still and for her to pay the costs “on a punitive scale”. In his affidavit, Moss describes himself as “an ardent birder” and said he has created various bird feeding contraptions on his premises to attract unique species of birds. “These birds are not just your everyday pigeons but breeds that birders pride themselves in seeing and capturing on camera.” Moss photographs “the rare birds” that fly into his yard. He said Still is his neighbour and has many pet cats. “The cats started to become a nuisance as they would enter my premises and prey on the birds.” He said that while he has lived at his address for almost three decades, Still is “simply renting for a much shorter period”. Moss said he had asked her on many occasions to put collars on her cats with bells so the birds would fly away at the first sign of danger. He claims that once on August 30 last year, when his wife again asked her to get bell collars for her cats, she refused and advised that “we should use a water gun or a paintball gun to shoot at her cats when they come into our premises and try to attack the birds”. Also read: Alleged cat shooter claims harassment Moss also alleged that when his wife asked Still if she wasn’t worried about her cats being attacked by the neighbours’ dogs, she’d replied “she’s had cats killed by dogs before and it wasn’t a concern”. His wife did buy a water gun to chase the cats away, he said. He claimed that on that evening, Still came to their house and began screaming at him, telling him to get out, that all the neighbours hate him and want him out. No attempts had been made by Still since then to help them solve the problem of the cats. Moss claimed that on June 28 this year, the neighbourhood called a meeting to discuss the monkey problem in the area and he and his wife had arrived only to find that the meeting was not about monkeys, but “rather to attack me and blame me for the death of Barbara’s cat”. He said Still was responsible for making The Witness run articles regarding the death of her cat, for which he was blamed. Allegations made against him have “gone viral” on various social media platforms and calls have been made to boycott his business, Walvin Hardware. “As a result of the harassment my name has been tarnished, my business has fallen into disrepute and my staff are at risk of losing their jobs.” Some of the posts are defamatory, he said. Moss and his family “have suffered a lot of stress” and he was also recently diagnosed with cancer, making “this already difficult period unbearable”.