 After months of investigation police and private
investigators uncovered the “secret stash” of a truck theft syndicate and
recovered millions of rands worth of stolen trucking equipment and goods. Around 10 containers, eight trailers, a truck as well as
stolen mining vehicle tyres, truck tyres and cases of beer, linked to an armed
robbery in Durban last week, were recovered by police in a night-time raid at
the weekend. Pietermaritzburg’s Rapid Response Unit (Flying Squad) had
received information on the syndicate’s hide-out in Cato Ridge and notified
other police units. Private investigators and security companies also attended
the scene. Police and forensic investigators involved in the
investigation meticulously photographed and recorded the various stolen items
found on an open grassy plot of land. Caz Weeks, an independent insurance surveyor for Africargo
and Transit Surveyers, told The Witness at the scene that one of the
trucks found there had been linked to an armed robbery in Durban last Thursday. He said 10 armed men had entered the Durban Container Depot,
tied up staff and security, and stolen three containers holding thousands of
cases of Heineken beers. One of the trucking companies affected was Chartered
Freight. Chartered Freight manager Trish Maistry said on Monday that
they had moved their containers to an independent container depot in Bayhead,
Durban, when the containers were stolen. “Upon a joint investigation with various parties, the
containers were discovered at a site in Cato Ridge,” said Maistry. “We are grateful to all involved in the recovery of our
containers although only a small amount of the [stolen] cargo was recovered. “We urge the public to contact the Pietermaritzburg Rapid
Response unit for any information regarding the balance of the cargo [Heineken
650 ml bottles].” Maistry said there were about 6 000 cases missing. Weeks said a search of the yard at Cato Ridge uncovered
stolen cargo related to various hijackings along the N3 and in other parts of
the province. He said they had positively identified one of the trailers
as one that was stolen in June. “Some of the stolen trailers and goods go back to incidents
that happened two months ago, while some were stolen 24 hours ago,” said Weeks. He added that the millions of rands worth of stolen goods is
suspected to be the work of a “massive syndicate”. Another investigator on scene, Shaun McGuone of Investipol
Forensic Investigations, told The Witness that once a truck or
trailer was stolen, it was often stripped, repainted and fitted with new
registration plates overnight. Aliwal Security director Sewraj Girdhurparsadh, who has been
in the truck security industry for two decades, said on Monday that the stolen
goods are sold at hugely reduced prices. “This provides a win-win-win situation for the criminals,
shopkeepers and consumers, hence information on these crimes is not very
forthcoming,” said Girdhurparsadh. “Needless to say, most of these transactions are cash and as
a result, the tax coffers are bypassed.” Girdhurparsadh said that in most cases the drivers colluded
with the criminals, which he said can result in “innocent drivers bearing the
brunt of harsh questioning and torture to get answers, also the stigma of being
involved even if not”. He said a truck and trailer cost around R1,5 million and
that the goods would be “a good few hundred thousand”. “Trucks are cloned or sold across the borders.” He added that truck drivers should use dedicated safe stops
and not take passengers for fare or favours. Drivers should plan their journeys
with predetermined stops in safe zones. Stolen goods estimated to be worth over R5 million Provincial police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said
yesterday that the goods and containers recovered had been hijacked at
different areas such as Howick, Brighton Beach and Maydon Wharf. “Another consignment of stolen mag wheels were also found as
well as tractor tyres and beer containers.” While exact estimates of the value of the stolen property
could not be ascertained on Monday, Gwala estimated the value at around R5
million. Other sources said the goods were worth more. “No arrests have been made, and investigations are
continuing. “All the stolen goods were identified by their owners,” said
Gwala. 