A teenager from St. Anne's Diocesan College for Girls had her dream come true when she was selected to dance in the Walt Disney World Annual Parade last month. The Grade 9 pupil, Ofentje Motubatse (15), originally from Fourways in Johannesburg, said dancing at the Walt Disney World Annual Parade has so far been the most “amazing experience of my life”. Motubatse flew out to Florida on June 19 to participate in the Disney parade, which took place on June 21. The youngster, who started dancing at the age of four, said she was scrolling on her Instagram when she came across a post by her favourite dancer calling for young aspiring dancers to join her in Florida. Motubatse decided to call the recruitment company to inquire about entry requirements. “I told my dance teacher about the opportunity and he choreographed a dance piece for me. We made a video and sent it through. I honestly didn’t think I’d be selected,” she said. A few months later, Motubatse received the good news that she had been selected. “I couldn’t believe it. I was literally running around the house screaming and jumping when I received the news,” she said. Motubatse said her father was happy for her but her mother was a little reluctant at first. “I needed a lot of money for the trip and my mother firstly dismissed the whole thing. I decided to go behind her back to try raising the money for myself.” Motubatse said that with help from her friends she created a FundMe page and started making a little money from there. “A friend’s mother told my mom about me fundraising money for my trip and I think that’s when my mom realised that I was actually serious about the trip. She gave in and ended up paying the rest of the money,” she said. Motubatse became the first person representing South Africa to participate at the Walt Disney World Annual Parade. The teenager said after completing matric, she plans to continue with her studies but also dance on the side as she cannot imagine her life without dance. “My life would feel empty without dance,” she said. She went on to thank her dance teacher, Bonwa Mbontsi, her parents and friends for supporting her.