As the fallout over land grips the country, Zulu king Goodwill Zwelithini on Wednesday described the ANC as an “enemy” of the Zulu people, a label that could have disastrous consequences for the ANC ahead of next year’s general elections. Addressing thousands of members of the Zulu ethnic group during a land Imbizo at the Ulundi stadium in northern KwaZulu-Natal, Zwethini made it clear that the ANC — which has taken a stance that all tribal land in the country should be transferred to the State, was on a mission to destroy the Zulu nation. “During the liberation struggle they made us feel as if we were fighting the same struggle, meanwhile they wanted to gain power so that they could oppress the Zulu people. “In 1994 they pretended as if they were comfortable with us but 24 years later, they have finally revealed their true colours — they never liked us in the first place,” he said. Zwelithini, who is the sole trustee of the Ingonyama Trust that administers over three million hectares of the province’s tribal land, had called the Imbizo against the backdrop of growing calls within the ANC for the trust to be dissolved. ANC leaders, including President Cyril Ramaphosa, want land currently under the trust to be transferred the State for allocation to rural dwellers occupying land within the trust’s jurisdiction but unable to get title deeds. However, Zwelithini accused the ANC leadership of using the issue of the Ingonyama Trust land to deflect attention from the government party’s failures. “There are protests every day over unemployment and lack of service delivery. Despite the fact that the Zulu nation lost all its land during the colonial period and was able to regain only a small portion in 1994, they have now turned their focus on us,” he said.  Thousands of Zulu warriors attend a land Imbizo at the Ulundi stadium in northern KwaZulu-Natal on Wednesday.  The ANC is currently battling internal divisions due to power struggles between factions within the party. Zwelithini said he would pray for the ANC’s internal upheavals to reach crisis levels. “For the hatred you have shown the Zulu people I wish that the divisions could worsen and that you continue fighting amongst yourselves until you become the laughing stock of the world,” he said. Despite the fact that the Imbizo took place midweek as opposed to over the weekend when most people were not at work, thousands, including Zulu warriors in full regimental regalia, found time to attend the event. Young women led by elder women, had also turned up in their hundreds. “I’m proud of you, your presence here shows that who are not ashamed of who you are. “I would like to use this opportunity to assure you that the land of the Zulu nation is not going anywhere. We are the offspring of heroes who fought great wars — that is why I’m not scared of anyone,” he said. KZN Premier Willies Mchunu and Police Minister Bheki Cele — who is also an ANC National Executive Committee (NEC) member viewed as close to Ramaphosa, were amongst the thousands who attended Wednesday’s Imbizo. Zwelithini shared the podium with Inkatha Freedom Party leader Mango­suthu Buthelezi, who accused ANC leaders of keeping quiet in the face of attacks directed at the King and his trust. “Not a single leader in the ANC spoke up,” he said.