The man charged in connection with an alleged road rage incident in which Farhad Manjoo was killed, claims he thought he was going to be hijacked. Bongani Mncwabe (30) appeared briefly in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court yon Monday and was remanded in custody until July 13. Also read: Midnight road rage killing in city centre His attorney, Phumlani Fakude, said Mncwabe should be granted bail because he handed himself over to police after the shooting and took officers to the scene “where he thought he was being hijacked”. Fakude did not say anything else in court about the incident that took place in the early hours of Saturday morning in Pietermaritz Street when Manjoo was killed. He has been described to The Witness as an angler, pool player, karate fan, author and DIY expert. Manjoo (58) and some of his friends got off work at the Kismet Hotel where he was a club manager and were on their way to look at a decor job when they got involved in an altercation with unknown men at the corner of Pietermaritz and Peter Kerchhoff streets. Two shots were fired and Manjoo was hit in the chest. Another man, Rajesh Aumesdew, was injured. Mncwabe has been charged with attempting to murder him. Prosecutor Rene Padayachee said there were “certain things” about this case the state was unhappy about. “The investigating officer is a Warrant Officer Khumalo. However, there is an affidavit filed by a Detective Constable Molefe stating that bail is not opposed due to the fact that he [Mncwabe] handed himself to police.” She continued there was a diary entry by another officer saying that bail was being opposed. Nevertheless, she added it was up to the state to oppose bail or not. In this case the safety of the witnesses has not been established. A profile has not been done of Mncwabe and the state does not know if he has any previous convictions or pending cases. Padayachee applied for the case to be postponed for a formal bail application, which Fakude opposed. The magistrate ruled in the state’s favour and granted the adjournment. After the case was adjourned, the Witness photographer took pictures of Mncwabe in the dock, and when he left the court he was confronted by members of the public who demanded he delete the photographs. They also threatened to assault him. The Witness has reported on several road rage incidents that ended in court. In December last year, Thobelani Khuzwayo, a policeman, was sentenced to 15 years’ imprisonment for the murder of Kavlin Naidoo. He was shot at the corner of Jabu Ndlovu and Retief streets in November 2014. In June 2016, Shakile Saktu was sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment for deliberately running down Luchelle Joubert in the parking lot at Liberty Midlands Mall in 2012. They had argued over a parking bay.