A highway run-in between a city teacher and security guards ended up in a heated showdown in the parking lot of Grace College, a private school in Hilton. Principal Vincent Luksich said on Tuesday that the young teacher, who he asked not be named due to the trauma of the incident, had changed lanes while travelling up Town Hill and cut off a Magma Security car in the process. Luksich said while the details of the incident were “still sketchy” it is believed the guards followed the teacher and tried to pull him over on the off-ramp from the N3. He said the teacher did not stop his car and continued his drive to work. However, when he entered the school gates, the Magma car pulled in after him. Three armed guards then “confronted him in the parking lot behind the school hall”, said Luksich. “Management was having a meeting at the time,” he added, and one of the members happened to look out of the window while the incident was unfolding. “I saw them all standing around the car. I went out and saw the teacher was very shaken.” Luksich said it was unclear whether the guards had pointed their guns at the teacher when they confronted him, but said they were all armed during the incident. “I think he was too shaken to tell us then what really transpired. “Luckily the pupils are on the other side of the building so no one saw what happened, but as a school, we called an assembly and told the pupils and staff about the incident. “The teacher went to class straight after assembly, but ended up going home. The school will be arranging a counsellor for him.” He said the teacher had only started at the school this year and is “a brilliant maths teacher”. Luksich added he had contacted Magma Security and had a meeting with senior management, who told the school they would be launching a full independent investigation into the matter. “We just want the truth about the confrontation and whether their security guards acted with the right protocol or not,” said Luksich. “If they investigate and the report says nothing wrong happened, then we will be happy, but we just want to know the truth.” Luksich added that a school is “a place of safety” and said he would not want another incident such as this to happen in the future. Luksich said the teacher was still recovering from the trauma and could not be contacted at the time of going to print on Tuesday afternoon. Magma Security director Shaheen Suleiman said the guards had been driving along the N3 when a man almost crashed into the back of them. He said the guards felt that the man was driving recklessly and thought he might have been trying to get away from someone or might have been involved in a criminal act. He said the guards tried to pull the teacher over to see if he was all right as he seemed agitated and in a rush, but he did not stop. “That is when they followed him into the school. No guns were pulled on anyone. We are here to serve and protect our community and the guards were trying to do their job.” Suleiman added that there would be an investigation into the matter.