Former Alexandra High School head boy Luyanda Mfeka has been featured in this year’s Mail and Guardian Top 200 young South Africans list. Now in its 13th year, the supplement showcases young people under the age of 35 who are making sterling contributions in their respective fields and who are shaping the country’s future. It celebrates talent in the fields of arts and culture, business and entrepreneurship, civil society, education, environment, film and media, health, justice and law, politics and government, science and technology, and sport. Mfeka (30) from Edendale, who is the spokesperson for Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba, said the nomination came as a surprise. “It’s an incredible honour,” he said. “Looking at the people who are on the list this year ... makes me look at the job I do and start thinking about how I push the envelope. It propels me to want to get better at what I do and give more.” Mfeka said that his job had taught him to be a lot more empathetic to people who rely on government services and assistance. “This isn’t communication for its own sake. It’s about ensuring that there is continuous accountability from government to residents. The most important part of the work I do is ensuring that communities have a means of connecting with their elected representatives within the executive arm of local government.” As the director of all mayoral communications, Mfeka said that his role “is far from being a walk in the park”. He co-ordinates all communication on behalf of the mayor, the latest in a string of roles he has played in local government structures. After studying law and journalism at Rhodes University, Mfeka became involved with the Democratic Alliance (DA) in a bid to launch a political career. His first official party role was as the DA’s senior legislative researcher, where he was responsible for establishing and managing the party’s internal legislative advisory unit in Parliament. He then served as spokesperson to Western Cape Health MEC Dr Nomafrench Mbombo, and served as a member of Lindiwe Mazibuko’s team during her term as parliamentary leader of the DA and the official leader of the opposition in Parliament. Raised by his grandparents, Mfeka holds the meaning of community close to his heart. “Ultimately, what gets me up in the morning is knowing that the work which I am fortunate to be a part of has real meaning to the lives of people within the city. The aim is to look out for the forgotten people.”