Controversial former Pietermaritzburg prison boss, Russel Ngubo, is dragging the Department of Correctional Services and the parole board to court. Ngubo is challenging the recent decision of the parole board to revoke his parole, which had been granted in November last year. The former ANC branch chairperson’s parole was revoked in April after allegations that he had broken his stringent parole conditions. He has been kept at Westville prison since then. Ngubo was earlier released on parole after serving 12 years of his 25-year prison term for murder. In 2005 he was convicted of the murder of two IFP members in Impendle in the late 1990s. In court papers filed at the Pietermaritzburg high court, Ngubo claims the decision to cancel his parole was unlawful. Ngubo said he was not given any chance to respond to any allegations made against him before his parole was cancelled. “The parole board has considered my matter and unilaterally without proper evidence decided to cancel my parole. My attorneys have written various letters requesting reasons for my arrest and no response was forthcoming,” Ngubo said in court papers. Ngubo faced allegations of violating home confinement, evading Correctional Services officials, disrupting community meetings and threatening councillors from Impendle Municipality. “As far as I am aware, none of the complaints were verified or any case opened against me ...” he said. The matter is set to be heard in court on August 7. Correctional Services spokesperson Thulani Mdluli said he was aware of the pending court case but declined to comment on the matter, saying it was sub judice. A close ally of Ngubo, who asked not to be named, said they believed Ngubo’s re-arrest was a “political hit”. “He was supposed to lead an anti-corruption march organised by community members when he was arrested. They want to silence him,” he said. The insider claimed Correctional Services officials had been pressured by politicians to revoke Ngubo’s parole after he had raised some concerns about the manipulation of processes in ANC branch general meetings held this year. Attempts to get comment from secretary of the suspended ANC Moses Mabhida region, Mzi Zuma, were unsuccessful.