Avid angler, pool player, karate fan, author and DIY expert, Farhad Manjoo, was killed by a single shot to the chest in a road rage argument in the city centre at the weekend. Manjoo (58) and some of his friends, who had just knocked off work at the Kismet Hotel where he was a club manager, had gone to look at a decor job one of them had done when they got caught up in an altercation with unknown men at the corner of Pietermaritz and Peter Kerchhoff streets just after midnight on Friday night. Two shots were fired, one piercing Manjoo’s chest and killing him instantly and the second grazing another man, who is recovering in hospital. Manjoo’s family, who described him as a gentle giant, said his death is an indication of the cancer of complete disregard for human life that is gripping South Africa. “From the reports that we’ve got Farhad actually had his arms wide open, which was a clear indication that he was unarmed and didn’t want to fight, but they still shot him,” said Manjoo’s brother, Shiraz Manjoo. He said his ailing mother Shantee Manjoo (93) and two sisters, who live in Johannesburg, took the news hard, and arrangements had been made for Shantee to make the six-hour trip to Pietermaritzburg in an ambulance. Also read: Attack: Road rage suspect hits man with sledgehammer A distraught Santosh Harrichand, Manjoo’s cousin, said she could not understand how someone so full of life could die such a senseless death. “He was using his body to shield those behind him when he was shot but that’s a kind a person he was — always protecting others even if it meant putting himself in harm’s way,” she said. She said Manjoo was a multi-skilled genius who could do just about anything he put his mind to. He was an avid fisherman, a DIY expert, a talented pool player and the author of So, you want to fish? The family said he also made delicious meals that had them asking for seconds even though he always left the kitchen looking like it had been hit by a tornado. Manjoo’s only child, Thashni Manjoo (29), fainted when she got the news of her father’s death. “My dad always taught me that the body is just a vessel and the soul lives on after death. I guess that was his way of preparing me for the passing of any of my loved ones. I just didn’t expect it to be him,” she said. She said she was expecting to be angry at the person who killed him but somehow felt calm because she knew that one day he will answer for his actions. “I know that my dad wouldn’t want me to carry that anger inside me. I also know that he wouldn’t have been able to live with himself had he moved out of the bullet’s way and exposed his friends to harm. He was a protector to his very last breath,” she said. To honour his memory, Thashni plans to work on programmes that fight against the scourge of gun violence. “He always made time for everyone, whether he knew you or not. If you called on him he would be there ready to help,” said son-in-law Kuberan Cooper. Thashni’s mother, Nessie Naidoo, said Manjoo may have had one biological child but he was a father to many. She said he was always ready to listen and was never judgmental or harsh. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a 30-year-old man was in custody and will be appearing in court on Monday on murder and attempted murder charges.