 A device believed to be a bomb was found last night at the mosque
in Verulam that was attacked last week. Reaction Unit South Africa said it evacuated several residences in
the vicinity after the device was located at the mosque by a worshipper as
people prepared for prayers. It was found under the moulana’s chair. The device was found wrapped with a cellphone. On Thursday, the mosque was attacked by three men. One worshipper
was killed and two people — including the moulana — were stabbed. The mosque leadership told Weekend Witness that
the prayer area had been closed by police and they had hired another venue. Before last night’s events, calls had been made not to jump to the
conclusion that the mosque was targetted because worshippeprs there follow the
minority Shia branch of Islam. Durban-based Islamic scholar Shaykh Rafeek Haseen had cautioned
against turning last week’s attack into a sectarian issue. “It may be a case of money laundering or a personal issue between
the perpetrators and the victims. I do not think we should jump to conclusions
that this attack is motivated by sectarianism,” Haseen said. However, others have said the attack was due to hate speech
against the minority Shia Muslim community. The assailants set part of the Imam Hussain Mosque in Ottawa,
Verulam, on fire, by allegedly tossing a petrol bomb, before fleeing. A member of the mosque’s leadership, Shanshah Ali, told The
Witness at the time of the attack he feared the incident was a “terror
attack” founded on clashing religious ideologies within Islam. Muslims primarily fall under the Shia and Sunni branches of the
faith. Sunnis are the vast majority and there is violent tension between the
two in some parts of the world, such as Iraq. It is believed that the attack was carried out by three men
described as “Egyptian nationals” wearing half balaclavas, who managed to flee
in a white Hyundai Getz with no registration plates. The attack has sent shockwaves through the local Muslim community,
who condemned the incident and labelled it the worst attack on any South
African mosque in history. An article published by the Sunday Tribune on Sunday
said the attack “came in the wake of hate speech against the Shia community
that has continued for years, and escalated to unparalleled levels recently”. In the article, the mosque’s chairperson Azad Seedat was quoted as
saying the attackers acted on hate and were copy cats of ISIS (Islamic State)
and that the attackers had visited the mosque three times prior to the attack
when it was quiet, prayed, and taken literature and books. The article went on to say that the Shia mosque was the only one
in KwaZulu-Natal and had been mentioned in an open letter calling for action
against Shia worshippers. The Sunday Tribune said the letter was published
on the Jamiatul Ulama and other websites. Jamiatul Ulama is a council of South
African Muslim theologians. It also reported that the Imam Hussain is one of only three Shia
mosques in South Africa, the others being the Ahlulbait mosque in Cape Town and
another in Edenvale, Johannesburg. National spokesperson of the Shia community, Moulana Sayed Aftab
Haider, was also quoted in the Tribune as saying the Shia
community represents around three perecent of the Muslim community in South
Africa. Haider said in the article that the attack on the Hussain mosque
was not an isolated incident but rather the result of hate speech that has been
ongoing for years.  