Police are on the hunt for the killer of a young Pietermaritzburg woman who was found with her throat cut in a pool of blood. Khulekile Sikhakhane (26) is believed to have been murdered in the early hours of Friday in the Braid Street home that she shared with three other women. Police said she was alone at home at the time of the murder as her three housemates had left the city for the long weekend. The young woman, originally from Elandskop, had worked as a cashier at a restaurant in Scottsville, and was described by those who knew her as “humble” and “always positive”. The young woman’s devastated family have said there will be a vigil for Sikhakhane on Friday and her funeral will be held in Elandskop on Saturday. “We are really confused and we are left with so many questions,” said Sikhakhane’s aunt, Thoko Sikhakhane. “We all know we are going to die one day but no one should have to suffer such a violent death,” she said. “We pray that the law takes its course so we can heal from this gaping wound.” Sikhakhane’s brother Skhonzi Sikhakhane said his sister was the youngest of nine siblings. Her five-year-old daughter will be cared for by the family, said Skhonzi, as that is what she would have wanted. “We are all heartbroken.” he said. Sikhakhane was a choir leader in her church. A neighbour, who asked not to be named, on Wednesday said she was at home asleep at the time of the murder. “I heard dogs barking. I am a very light sleeper so I went outside and stood on my veranda and was looking around.” At about 1.30 am she saw a man jump over the fence of Sikhakhane’s house and within five minutes, he escaped the property and fled up Braid Street carrying two packets. “He was wearing off-white pants, a brown shirt and a cap,” said the neighbour. “He was tall and of average build”. She added that she had not heard any screaming prior to the dogs barking. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said police were called to the house by the owner of the building on Friday morning. He said Sikhakhane was found in her room, lying on her back in a pool of blood with “a stab would to her neck”. He said it appeared that a kitchen knife had been used as the murder weapon. It is believed that when the killer entered Sikhakhane’s home, she immediately locked herself inside her bedroom. Ngobese said her door had been kicked down and the entire house was disturbed, as if the killer “was looking for something”. He said no arrests had been made and investigations were ongoing.