The 167th Royal Show opened its doors on Friday for an action-packed weekend. Royal Agricultural Society CEO Terry Strachan said the first day was a success and all indications at that stage pointed to a successful weekend. “Although the first few hours of any large show or exhibition has its challenges, the opening day of the Royal Show appeared to have favourably met the expectations of exhibitors and public alike. “In addition, the panel tasked with judging exhibits [in advance of award presentations today] is of the opinion that the standard of display in many areas is well up on that of 2017,” he said. The weekend saw a very busy Royal Show with performances from the East Coast Radio Royal Rock Concert — featuring Matt Gardiner, Matthew Mole and Mi Casa, the Royal Symphony Concert, and The RSG Concert — featuring Armand “The Singing Cowboy”, Elizma Theron, Brendan Peyper and Refentse. Visitor Lucky Ntsindane (15) from Bulwer said the highlight of his weekend was watching the animals and riding a camel, as he is from a farming area where his family own many cattle. “I grew up surrounded by many animals and I used to herd them to the field. Basically I was responsible for them and getting them home before dark. So I was excited to see the animals at the showground and compare them to the ones we have at home. “It was good to be surrounded by familiar sights, but also new adventures like riding a camel; those things are huge,” he said. Thandeka Grootboom (31) from Durban said the highlight of her weekend was watching Mi Casa perform because it has always been her dream to watch them live as they are her favourite group. “I only came for Mi Casa on Saturday. I’m not big on the show like I used to be before. I wish I could’ve met them backstage and had the opportunity to take photos with them though. I love J’Something,” she said.  Three-year-old Aaliyah Madlala gets into the groove during the Mi Casa set. Jarryd Miles (8) from Hayfields said his highlight was playing games and eating junk food. “I’m here with my parents who came here for the art and all the boring adult things; I’m here to have fun. I’ve been on the Ferris wheel, the go-kart, the sticky wall, and I’ve been eating a lot of junk food,” he said “I also got to hold a snake for the first time, but they had to pull it out when it went inside my jacket, but it didn’t bite me, it just went in there because it was warm.” People can expect more fun-filled entertainment this week — from concerts, fireworks displays, vintage tractor displays, show-jumping, hundreds of craft and home industry exhibitions as well as competitions for birds, livestock and agricultural produce. Other special live performances include: • The Hindvani FM Extravaganza, which will see a fusion of entertainment from flash entertainers to Bhangra, on Saturday evening, June 2, and • The Umgungundlovu Youth Festival in conjunction with Gagasi FM, which will include kwaito legend L’vovo and others, performing on the main stage on June 3. The 2017 Royal Show runs from May 25 — June 3.