 Four members of a Copesville family died instantly
in a crash near Ashburton on Saturday evening, while a fifth was still fighting
for her life in Edendale Hospital last night. The family said they were “still very numb”
following the tragedy and were not able to comment at the time of going to
print. The unsuspecting family had been travelling along
the N3 northbound near the Ashburton off-ramp when a bus travelling in the
opposite direction crashed through the median and tore through the family’s car
at around 6 pm on Saturday. According to Netcare911, the bus had about 120
passengers on board. ER24 advanced life support paramedic Andrew Brown
said the bus had been travelling towards Durban when it is thought to have
clipped the back of a bakkie. Brown said the roads were wet but proper police
investigations would determine the cause of the accident. He said after the bus
clipped the back of the bakkie, it went through the median and hit the car
carrying five people head-on. The bus went through the roadside barrier and down
a short embankment. Four of the people in the car were declared dead at
the scene while ER24 paramedics were able to stabilise the surviving family
member through advanced life support interventions and rushed her to Edendale
Hospital where she remains in a critical condition. Brown said three passengers from the bus, including
a pregnant woman had minor injuries and were taken to Northdale hospital by
other ambulance services. He said the driver of the bakkie and the driver of
the bus were uninjured. Midlands EMS advanced life support paramedic,
Thomas Youens, who was also at the scene said it had been “a very tragic
scene”. He said the bus had torn the car apart and the fire
department was on scene and specialised equipment was used to extricate the
family from the mangled wreck. He said there were four women and one man in the
car and that one of the women had been ejected from the vehicle. The family were contacted on Sunday but they
declined to speak to the press. Traffic on the N3 just before the Ashburton
off-ramp, toward Pietermaritzburg was still severely backed up early on Sunday
morning while emergency and towing services cleared the road of all the rubble
and debris left from the crash. Services were also still busy recovering the bus
that had landed down a small embankment by 10 am on Sunday.