 President Cyril Ramaphosa has formed a ministerial
task team to probe political killings in the province as the SAPS political
task team has failed to get to the bottom of the killings. Ramaphosa said on Monday the team would be formed by
Police Minister Bheki Cele, State Security Minister Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba,
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula and Justice
Minister Michael Masutha. Addressing ANC members who came to pay their respects
at the kwaPata home of slain ANC activist Musawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu,
Ramaphosa said there had been no arrests made by the task team since its
formation except the arrests made after the killing of ANC activist Sifiso Cele
in Margate last week. “I want them to meet on Monday and give me a report by
the end of [next] week. We want to know who are the people behind the killings
of our comrades. I want to know what is really happening in the province. An
immediate investigation must happen. Those responsible for these killings must
be immediately arrested and brought to justice. We will not allow KZN to be the
killing fields of SA,” he said. Ramaphosa was accompanied by ANC national chairperson
Gwede Mantashe and ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte. Divisions in the ruling party were again laid bare
when ANC activists who sang and danced outside Mchunu’s house for about two
hours while waiting for Ramaphosa, booed Duarte and cheered Mantashe. Durban businessman and Sanco treasurer Roy Moodley,
was also confronted by ANC activists who questioned his presence there. Ramaphosa conceded that political killings in the
province were getting out of hand. “Mchunu is the 14th person to be killed in this
region. This needs to stop now. Those who did this will be found. They can hide
wherever they want but [Bheki] Cele will find them,” he said. Ramaphosa, who shelved an urgent discussion on the
North West to deal with political killings in the province, started his visit
by meeting the ANC regional leadership before going to Mchunu’s house in
KwaPata. After visiting the Mchunu family, Ramaphosa met with
leaders of the aggrieved branches including Msunduzi councillors Mtuza Mkhize,
Sandile Dlamini, Mehmood Oumar and former councillor Sibusiso Mkhize, before
driving to Durban where he met with members of the provincial task team. Ramaphosa said the killing of the former ANC Youth
League regional leader, who was serving as the Sanco provincial organiser, was
a blow to the ANC’s unity attempts. “He was working for unity in this region. We hope his
blood will strengthen the organisation,” he said. ANC members shouted names of senior ANC regional
leaders whom they accused of being behind the killings. They also pressured Ramaphosa to disband the Moses
Mabhida regional executive committee. Used cartridges seen by The Witness on
Friday night after Mchunu had been shot when he pulled onto his driveway, were
still scattered at the scene on Monday. Ramaphosa told the crowd that they would discuss the
calls for the regional conference to be postponed. “We are going to discuss it and we [will] give you a
report back,” he said. Ramaphosa promised also to give the aggrieved party
members an audience about their allegations of corruption in Msunduzi. “We will come back and hear what is going on in your
municipality,” he said. Ramaphosa called for calm ahead of national elections,
saying the ANC needed to be united and strong before next year’s polls.  