Two teenagers from Sweetwaters want justice after they were allegedly badly beaten and “left to die”, in what they believe was a racially fuelled attack. Mduduzi Mdunge (19) and his friend Simphiwe Mdletshe (18) were apparently beaten unconscious and called the k-word by a group of white men in Hilton last Saturday morning. The pair were left on the side of the road where they were roused by a security guard who had been patrolling the area. The incident left the two friends with broken jaws, lacerations to their heads, swollen eyes and many bruises. Recalling their terrifying ordeal, the two, who are employed as temporary workers at a pub in Cedara, claim to have been walking home at around 5 am after their shift when the incident occurred. Mdunge said when they were walking in Mountain Homes in Hilton, they were confronted by man on a motorbike who asked them where they were headed. “We told him that we were walking home to Sweetwaters. He instructed us to leave the area immediately ... threatening that there will be trouble if we don’t.” Mdunge said the biker sped off and later made a u-turn and headed back to them where he ordered them to sit down while he made a phone-call. “We are not sure who he was calling but a few minutes later a vehicle arrived with three armed men. They shoved us to the ground and started interrogating us,” he said. He claims that while that was going on, another male joined the group and started using profane language. “He was hurling racial slurs at us,” said Mdunge. “We were confused because we didn’t know what was going on. We were just on our way home. We are not criminals. We work for our pocket money. We were not going anywhere to cause trouble. He called us k*****s and said we had stolen from him.” Shange said the man claimed that his house in the area had been burgled, and he suspected that they were responsible for it. “They just started hitting us. One of them slammed me on the concrete paving and then started punching me in the face. I kept asking what I did but he just beat me until I passed out.” He said the last thing he remembers was being choked. “He choked me and I could not breathe and then I passed out.” Mdunge said his friend told him that they were woken up by a security guard where they lay on the road. The security guard also called an ambulance and they were taken to Northdale hospital. “I’m still traumatised and in pain. I had my mid-year examinations last week but had to miss school because of the extent of my injuries. I couldn’t go with a swollen face,” he said. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese confirmed that a case of assault with intent to do grevious bodily harm was opened at Hilton. No arrests have yet been made.