Disgruntled ANC members are threatening to make KwaZulu-Natal ungovernable if the party’s national leadership continues to ignore their pleas for an urgent intervention into issues facing the organisation. The group of approximately 800 dissatisfied members, from six regions, gathered at the Durban’s Curries Fountain Stadium on Sunday where their leaders presented a memorandum of grievances to the ANC national executive committee (NEC) member Zoleka Capa. Lower South Coast regional leader Howard Msomi said the ANC has been turned into a “spaza shop” and gate-keeping is rife. He said members of the ANC are being prevented from participating in the branch general meetings, which denies them the chance to nominate their preferred candidates ahead of the looming provincial and regional elective conferences. Msomi said the provincial interim committee has failed to attend to complaints from members because it is factional, so the NEC must send a neutral team to deal with them. “Our comrades who are raising these issues are now being murdered but we are not going to retreat. “We are requesting the NEC’s immediate intervention … Who else must die before the NEC acknowledges that there are problem are that need to be urgently attended to? “From now onwards we will make KwaZulu-Natal ungovernable until we ware listened to. We want decisive action,” said Msomi. Msunduzi councillor and member of the outgoing regional executive committee in the Moses Mabhida area, Mtuza Mkhize, said they will not stop speaking out against the injustice within the ANC because it is their responsibility as members in good standing. “The ANC took special resolutions that those who bring firearms or assault people in an ANC meeting will be suspended on the spot but of late people are now firing shots inside the branch general meetings and comrades are intimidated but nothing has been done,” he added. Thabani Nyawose, from the eThekwini region, said they are disappointed in the NEC for delaying addressing the grievances. “There are NEC members deployed to our province and we were expecting them soon after the conference, in December last year, to come closer to the province and begin the process of uniting ANC members by attending to all issues or problems that were known before the Nasrec conference but today those problems remain the same because they have not been attended to.”