MK veterans have offered to help solve political killings in KZN. Speaking at Thursday’s memorial service in the city hall for slain ANC activist Musawenkosi “Qashana” Mchunu, Mkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association provincial chairperson Themba Mavundla promised mourners that veterans would go to communities to find the killers. “When we find those behind the trigger, we are going to ask them who ordered the hit. When they tell us that, we will then hand them to police. If there is no conviction after that, we will then take necessary steps,” he said. Mavundla said “I am hearing all of you here complaining that there have been no arrests. Mkhonto weSizwe was formed in 1961 after the Sharpeville Massacre. It was formed because we knew no one would be arrested for that massacre and it had been formed to defend ANC members.” ANC national executive committee (NEC) member and National Assembly chief whip, Jackson Mthembu said the Moses Mabhida regional executive committee should not rush to conference. Mchunu, who was shot and killed when he pulled into his driveway on Friday, had led several marches to regional offices to demand that the regional conference be postponed. “How can we have a conference when there are these tensions? We cannot think about the regional conference until we find these killers and lock them up.” The former ANC national spokesperson called for police to move with speed in finding those behind the killings. “I can not believe that 14 people have been killed here in Moses Mabhida region but not even a single person has been arrested. What kind of government are we? We cannot have people being killed right, left and centre but have no arrests,” he said. Mthembu said he would talk to Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Minister Zweli Mkhize, about investigations into Msunduzi. “Why is everyone calling for an investigation into Msunduzi if everything is going well in this municipality?” he asked. Provincial task team (PTT) convener Mike Mabuyakhulu said the PTT had agreed that the departments of Cogta, the Office of the Premier and Provincial Treasury institute a probe into the affairs of Msunduzi after they met with Mchunu a week ago. Mabuyakhulu confirmed to The Witness on Thursday that the regional conference would not be held until they deal with issues raised by branches of which Mchunu was a convener. Mchunu’s close allies said they felt they were under attack from within the ANC. Regional secretary of the SA National Civic Organisation, Fanle Sibisi, said Mchunu had not been killed by a member of an opposition party, but by ANC members. “He did not die in a car accident. He was killed while fighting corruption and maladministration. We will not pretend as if everything is normal when we are under attack from within ANC.” REC member Mtuza Mkhize said the REC had let Mchunu down when it did not choose him as a ward councillor in 2016, when he had emerged as a favourite in the branch general meeting and during the community meeting. “Like it or not, this current REC does not deserve to be future leaders,” he said. Meanwhile, ANC Youth League regional chairperson Mxolisi Mkhize apologised on behalf of the league for a statement made at the weekend by its regional secretary, Thembinkosi Zondi, that the regional conference should go ahead.