Pietermaritzburg-born journalist Yadhana Jadoo has been hailed for being an inspiration and leader to her generation. Jadoo (34), a news editor at the Citizen, died two weeks ago while attending a training course for young African journalists in Egypt. She was laid to rest on Monday. Hundreds of mourners, including family, friends and colleagues in the media industry who gathered at the Gujarati Vedic Society Hall to bid her farewell, said her compassion and leadership as a news editor had left an enduring legacy. It was for this reason that Citizen editor Trevor Stevens said Jadoo’s death would leave a void. “She was an exceptional journalist, often turning average stories into leads at the last minute. She won numerous awards at Caxton and was our go-to girl. She’d never let you down and she did her work with a smile,” said Stevens. Jadoo was described as a thoughtful and caring colleague. “There was more to Yadhana that made an impression on so many other people. She was caring and she was feisty. She made an impact on almost everyone that she met and she had a way with people.” Stevens, who worked with Jadoo for six years, said when she applied for a job to work at the Saturday edition of the Citizen, he knew immediately that she was the perfect candidate. Jadoo joined the Citizen newsroom in 2012 after working at the South African Press Association (Sapa) and the Post. She won numerous awards at the newspaper, including Journalist of the Year in 2017. Paying an emotional tribute, one of Jadoo’s closest friends, Benita Enoch, said she had been left shattered and devastated by Jadoo’s sudden death. “I am grateful for the gentle way in which she coaxed us to remember to slow down and appreciate the present and laugh often. She always said life is short; the truth of her lesson has never resounded more loudly than today,” said Enoch. She said she was thankful to have experienced Jadoo’s tenacity for pursuing her passion. “Yadz’s passion for social justice and human rights taught us that there is more that connects us than what keeps us apart. She meticulously applied herself to making sure that her articles were true and making sure that she was not re-traumatising victims through her writing. “Professionally, her humanity changed the face of journalism both inside the newsroom and out,” added Enoch. Jadoo’s cousin, Nabeel Hammand, said the family were going through a “horrific” time, tortured by the fact that she was not surrounded by them when she died. “She was one in a million. She my was big sister, my friend and my guardian. I could always rely on her and she would go to the ends of the earth for me. “She was the glue in our family. Yadz would get us together for Christmas and decide what we are eating. “We will miss her very much.” Jadoo is survived by her parents and sister.