 What's the hold-up? That’s what nine senior managers at Msunduzi and the DA are
asking in light of the delays in investigating the numerous allegations
levelled against the City boss, Sizwe Hadebe. The managers have written to the Minister for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), Dr Zweli Mkhize, asking about the
forensic investigation into what they term an alleged attempt by Hadebe to
centralise power and turn the municipality into a breeding ground for corruption. The group, who put their necks on the line in February by
asking the provincial and national governments to intervene in the alleged
corruption in Msunduzi, say no one from the provincial Cogta has contacted them
following their complaints. They are requesting administrative intervention and the
immediate stoppage of the ensuing maladministration, which they say will assist
in reversing Msunduzi’s disclaimer audit opinion. In March, Mkhize asked MEC for Cogta Nomusa Dube-Ncube to
investigate the allegations by the managers but according to them, that has not
happened. They said they are concerned that time is running out as the
90-day investigation, according to their interpretation of the Municipal
Systems Act (MSA), is supposed to have been concluded by June 26. The managers said they have read inThe Witness that KZN
Cogta investigations are afoot; however, they are not privy to the intent and
content of those investigations, despite having been first to raise concerns
about administrative malfeasance in Msunduzi. “As complainants we are deeply concerned that it appears
there is a deliberate exclusion or marginalisation from ongoing
investigation(s) reportedly taking place under the jurisdiction of KZN Cogta,”
they said. The managers are now threatening to invoke Section 106(5)(a)
and (b) of the MSA if KZN Cogta does not contact them by the end of this month. According to the act, where an MEC fails to conduct an
investigation within 90 days, notwithstanding a request from the minister, the
minister can conduct the probe and must send a report detailing the outcome of
the inquiry to the president. Meanwhile, the DA’s Msunduzi caucus leader Sibongiseni
Majola has written to the Speaker, Jabu Ngubo, asking her to convene a special
council meeting to discuss the allegations of misconduct levelled against
Hadebe. These include a probe into an audio recording where a senior
official, believed to be Hadebe, was caught asking his subordinate to
manipulate job interview scores as well as processes related to an engineering
tender. Last month Hadebe survived the DA’s proposal during a full
council meeting to suspend him, as the ANC and ACDP were of the view that the
City should get a legal opinion on the matter before instituting disciplinary
action against him. “The DA defines the allegations levelled against Hadebe as
very serious hence we feel that an urgent council meeting will open room for
robust debate and engagement on the topic ensuring that an independent
investigation is instituted followed with the precautionary suspension of the
city manager,” Majola said. He said the DA is also concerned with the alleged lack of
political will and urgency from Mayor Themba Njilo to deal with the matter. “It is disturbing that at the last council meeting, Mayor
Njilo defended Hadebe who has been at the centre of controversy for misusing
his powers as an executive in the city,” said Majola. He threatened that the DA will approach the court if Njilo
continues to deny their request to deal with the allegations made against
Hadebe. “We cannot allow the municipality to disintegrate into
squalor in the defence of a connected few. “The rights of employees must be a priority, while service
delivery to the residents of the city is also assured,” said Majola. Njilo rejected the allegations made by the DA, saying he is
still honouring his commitment to the councillors to deal with the matter. “I’m not protecting anyone. My responsibility as mayor is to
protect this municipality and we agreed as councillors that I should get a legal
opinion and just yesterday [Tuesday] I was meeting with the legal team. As
promised, the full report will be tabled in the next full council,” he said. Attempts to get comment from Hadebe were unsuccessful. KZN Cogta spokesperson Lennox Mabaso said the department
already had a forensic investigation looking into several issues, including
maladministration, which was under way when Mkhize wrote to Dube-Ncube. He said the Provincial Treasury has been asked to assist
with the inquiry and the office of Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has
commissioned its own probe into the allegations of fraud and corruption in
Msunduzi. “Before launching a new investigation there is a process
that must be followed and that includes assessing that the allegations being
raised are not merely duplicating what is already being investigated,” he said. 