Colleagues of the Edendale Hospital midwife Ntombizodwa Charlotte Dlamini (40) who was gunned down by her husband on Mother’s Day, bid farewell to her at a memorial service at the hospital on Thursday. The mother of two was shot and killed by her prison warder husband, Sipho Dlamini, at her parents’ home in Bisley, on Mother’s Day. It is alleged he had beaten her the day before. After the shooting, Sipho fled in his car to the Richmond/Eston Road where police eventually tracked him down on Sunday afternoon. After a six-hour standoff with police, the warder shot himself in the head in front of more than 20 police officers at around 11 pm. Read: ‘He was like a madman’ Musa Mseleku, KZN businessman and television socialite who came to fame after starring in a reality show showcasing his life with his four wives, also attended the service with three of his wives on Thursday. Mseleku said he had started campaigning against the rise of the killing of women by the hands of their partners or ex-partners. “I as a man cannot sit down and watch as other men continue killing women. I may not be doing it but if I am quiet about it, I am as guilty as the perpetrator. “I urge all women to have someone to confide in about their relationships because it is easier for an outsider to see signs of abuse before the bomb explodes. I also urge men not to abuse their loved one,” said Mseleku. KZN Health MEC Sibongiseni Dhlomo, said the uMgungundlovu District had the highest number of “sudden and unexpected deaths” of health practitioners but Edendale Hospital was the hospital with the highest number of nurses who suffered such deaths. “I am very familiar with this podium I am standing behind today [Thursday]. We have bid farewell to three Edendale Hospital nurses who passed away in similar circumstances.” Dhlomo urged all women in verbally or physically abusive relationships to leave. “It worries me that there are women who stay in abusive relationships and marriages just because they are economically dependent on their partners. How do you stay with a man who continuously rapes your child and you don’t report it just because you want food on your plate? “I am pleading to all women, employed or unemployed, to get out of abusive relationships. Even if you are not working, God will provide. Get out of demonic and satanic relationships, you can’t live like that, you will die at the end,” he said. Dlamini was described by her colleagues as a “quiet, neat and impeccably efficient midwife”. Addressing the mourners at the memorial, the acting CEO of Edendale Hospital Sizile Masemola said Dlamini was a dedicated midwife who loved her job and her death was a huge loss to the hospital and the community it serves. Another colleague, the operational manager at the obstetrics and gynaecology unit, said Dlamini was an exemplary health practitioner. The Dlamini couple are survived by their two sons aged eight and 11 years old. The nurse’s funeral will be at the Manyathi Church on Edendale Road at 9 am on Saturday.