Kwaito star Nomasonto “Mshoza” Maswanganyi’s short traditional marriage to an already married man is on the rocks in more ways than one. First she accused the businessman of assault, and now his “lawful” wife, Dudu­zile Mvula, is determined to crush their once blissful union. Mvula on Wednesday turned to the Pietermaritzburg high court to have the marriage between the musician and Thuthukani Mvula annulled. The case was adjourned to a date to be arranged. She claims in court papers that her husband, Thuthukani Mvula of Bergville, married the kwaito star in a traditional ceremony in November even though he is married to her. The customary marriage is unlawful and the Marriages Act prohibits any spouse married in terms of it from entering into any other marriage, including any customary marriage, she added. Mvula spoke about the history with her husband in the affidavit and how she learned about his new marriage. Mvula said she has been estranged from him since 2013 and moved out of their matrimonial homes due to “psychological and financial abuse”. She recently learned from the media and social networks that he has married Mshoza while her marriage to him still exists. She found out that his and Mshoza’s families engaged in and concluded lobola negotiations on November 25. Also, Mshoza’s family “handed her over” to the businessman. While the Mvula marriage might have “disintegrated to a point that there is no reasonable prospects of restoration to a normal marriage”, and she is in the process of instituting divorce proceedings, Mvula said it did not excuse her husband’s conduct. A letter in the court file dated March 12 said the businessman intends to oppose the application. However, there were no replying papers and neither he nor his new wife were represented in court. Mshoza could not be reached for comment. Meanwhile, according to media reports, this month Mshoza fled the home she shared with Thuthukani amid allegations of assault and infidelity. However, Thuthukani denied the assault allegations.