Former president Jacob Zuma’s son, Edward, wants ANC top leaders to censure Tourism Minister Derek Hanekom for his negative remarks about Zuma’s affair with a 24-year-old woman, former Maritzburger Nonkanyiso Conco. The young woman, whom Zuma met at a Reed Dance, has recently given birth to Zuma’s 23rd child. “His statement represents the highest form of disrespect of other people’s culture. As a tourism minister he should be protecting and promoting our culture and not looking down on it as he has done. “I’m writing to the ANC National Executive Committee (NEC) demanding that drastic action should be taken against Hanekom for displaying such high levels of disrespect of other people cultures,” Edward said. This after Hanekom tweeted that Zuma was “facing so many corruption charges; who brought our country to the brink of disaster and who thinks it’s okay, as a 76–year-old man, to get a 24-year-old girl pregnant”. Edward Zuma said Hanekom’s remarks were an insult to those South Africans who chose to live a polygamous lifestyle as permitted by both the Constitution and many of the country’s diverse cultures. “What is even more worrying is the fact that he is also an ANC NEC member. It is unacceptable that the ANC, which promotes cultural diversity, can have such an insensitive person serving at one of its highest structures,” he said. Zuma, who already has four wives, is said to be in the process of marrying Conco. Hanekom, who has had run-ins with Zuma before, in 2016 tabled a motion of no confidence against Zuma, who at the time was still both the ANC and country’s president. Edward said the fact that Hanekom chose to publicly attack Zuma instead of raising whatever concerns he had with him and Conco within ANC structures, was proof that the Tourism minister was still pursuing factional battles. “It shows that efforts by the ANC top leadership to unify the party mean nothing to Hanekom as he continues to sow divisions,” he said. Hanekom was not available for comment but a close confidante told The Witness that he now regretted having made the remarks. “Look, Zuma is no longer the president, he is facing a number of legal challenges, why still pursue him?” the source said.