Families of missing couple Nozipho Mnguni and Langelakhe Mazeka are hoping the skeletal remains recently found by the Umhlathuzana River near Mariannhill, are theirs. Mazeka (41) left their home in Mpola, in Mariannhill on the evening of December 13 to escort his girlfriend of three years, Mnguni (27) home from work in Pinetown but they were never seen again. Mazeka, who was unemployed at the time, would always go to meet Mnguni whenever she knocked off late at work since she had to pass the dense Umhlathuzana Forest, walking to their home. On Tuesday the provincial SAPS spokesman Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said remains believed to be those of the missing couple were found on Monday evening. “Although the families identified their clothes, DNA analysis will be conducted to identify the bodies,” he said. Speaking to The Witness on Tuesday afternoon, Mnguni’s sister Lindi Zondi said the families were yet to go to for DNA testing on Wednesday. “I can’t say we are relieved because we haven’t confirmed that it’s them. It’s really difficult because if the remains are theirs then it means they are no more, but also if it’s not them then it means the search continues. I’m sure you must understand how hard this is on us,” she said. Her sentiments were echoed by Mazeka’s cousin Thembani Khanyile, who said the family would be able to find closure if it is them. “Our prayer has always been that they’d be found alive and we haven’t lost hope yet … It’s going to take about four weeks to get the DNA results, but if it’s them then the healing process can begin, because right now we are in limbo,” he said. Both said their families were puzzled about why someone would kidnap the couple because they were neither rich nor involved in anything illegal. Khanyile said Mazeka’s identity document, cellphone and wallet were also found in the house after they went missing. Mnguni worked as a waitress while Mazeka lost his job early last year and was looking for work. The couple lived with Mnguni’s two children aged 11 and seven, but they were visiting the family home in Greytown at the time of the incident. “I still haven’t been able to bring myself to tell her children what happened. Whenever they ask I keep telling them that she is away on a job but she will come back one day. “But if the remains are theirs I guess I have to dig somewhere for the strength to tell them the truth,” said Zondi.