Hilton residents who were at the scene when two Sweetwaters teenagers were assaulted on the weekend said they are “not vigilantes” and the attack was not racially spurred. They said one man — whom residents on the road don’t know — assaulted the teenagers, and before they could do anything, the assailant was being pulled away by his two companions. They added that at no stage were the youngsters called the K-word. However, the man who attacked the two youngsters, who were on their way home from work, did refer to them as “Tsotsis”, the residents said. Two residents, who did not want to be named, gave similar accounts of what transpired on Saturday, which differs from that given by Mduduzi Mdunge (19) and his friend Simphiwe Mdletshe to The Witness. They said a group of white men hurled racial slurs at them, hit them and left them on the side of the road to die. The residents said that since the article, messages have been sent on community safety groups expressing disgust that the young men were assaulted and that the Hilton community has a group of “vigilantes”. But that was not the case, said one resident. He said the community is closely knit and sick and tired of being held “under siege by constant house break-ins and attempts at vehicle theft”. The homeowner who first saw the teenagers that night said that because crime in Mountain Homes has got out of control since December, community WhatsApp groups have become very active. That morning, just after 5 am, there was a message on a chat group that two men were seen walking through the dump site. This is the route that criminals apparently take to get into the area. He got onto his quad bike and went to investigate. About 600 metres down the road, he saw the two teenagers and asked them where they were going. They said they were lost and trying to get to Sweetwaters. He told them the road came to an end. “One man was more aggressive than the other.” He added that he then went back home to phone the police. He returned to find the teenagers and told them he had called the police and they should wait. By that time, a few people started converging. A local from a corner house said the house next to his had just been broken into. The resident said the next thing he knew, a man was attacking one of the teens and was being pulled away, and the other youngster was bleeding. “I don’t know who this man is. I have never seen him before.” He added that members of the community waited with the injured men for help to arrive. The other resident said: “We will not tolerate it any longer and will act within the confines of the law to bring any active criminals to book by engaging with security companies, the police and the K9 unit”. The assault was not reported to police by residents.