Theft and negligence has led to Msunduzi not being able to account for assets valued at more than R9 million. Last year The Witness reported that the City was investigating 7 784 assets valued at R68 million that could not be located during its annual verification process in June. According to the report on the investigation, 3 530 items were still unverified in February. The missing assets include 185 air conditioners worth R1 million, 505 computer hardware items worth R2,1 million, 412 tables and desks worth R185 824, as well as 425 plant and equipment items costing R2,8 million. There are also 229 cabinets, two tractors, 19 trailers as well as three trucks and bakkies missing. A total of 32 assets, including 20 brushcutters and a Toyota truck, with a carrying value of R378 522 were reported as stolen by the business units during the investigation. The remaining unverified assets are still subject to further probing and business units have been requested to investigate and provide case numbers where assets are lost prior to recommendation for write-off by council. Assets manager Sakhile Ngcobo said the list of missing assets “depicts poor physical and internal controls over assets by the business units as they do not complete asset movement or transfer or disposal forms and no officials are responsible for implementing physical and internal controls over assets.” He said the information communication technology unit also does not complete asset disposal forms or make a list when they strip or use old computers for spares to repair other computers. Ngcobo said some of the assets were lost due to inadequate exit controls to return the municipality’s assets when the employees and councillors resign or vacate their offices when their employment term expires. “Business units or departments do not report stolen assets to SAPS timeously and no investigations and disciplinary processes and recovery is done,” he said. Ngcobo recommended that council writes off all the stolen assets and that going forward business units should exercise more control over the assets allocated to them. He said the municipality must also develop an exit control for councillors and employees who are leaving the city to ensure that they return assets allocated to them, such as laptops and that the furtniture and other office equipment is still available in their offices. Should the city finds any of the items not returned or in the office then a recovery process should be instituted. “Security controls should be improved by all business units to minimise theft or loss of municipal assets,” he said. The current asset verification for 2017/2018 is currently in progress and the report is expected to come before council next month.