 Ntombizodwa Dlamini, Zolile Khumalo, Siam Lee and Karabo
Mokoena are but a few of the most recent intimate femicide victims, and the
list seems to grow every day. Intimate femicide is defined as the murder of women by their
current or ex-partners, same-sex partner or a rejected would-be lover. A report by Africa Check revealed that the global rate of
femicide for 2015 was 2,4 per 100 000 women. South Africa’s rate for the same
year was 9,6 per 100 000 women — a chilling four times higher. Although police are unable to quantify the increase in
incidents of violence against women and children countrywide, Pietermaritzburg
police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese admitted the numbers are on the
rise. “Generally we have seen a peak in cases of domestic violence
directed at women and we are very concerned about this. We need to do awareness
campaigns together with the Department of Social Development, Health and the
municipality to remind women in such situations that there are structures in
place to help and protect them before it’s too late.” Ngobese appealed to women in abusive relationships to report
the matter to the police and to leave abusive partners. “We have seen how such relationships end usually in
fatalities, so it is important for people to speak up and get help to prevent
them from dying at the hands of their partners,” he said. Many factors can lead a man to abuse a woman Weekend Witness wanted to get an understanding of why these
violent acts against women occur. Pietermaritzburg Clinical Psychologist Clive Willows said
there is no single answer to the question of why men abuse women but there are
common factors that are usually present. “Many men share a set of beliefs regarding their ‘right’ to
be the dominant partner in a relationship and the view about women that they
are subservient and possessions. Such beliefs can promote an arrogant
disrespect manifesting in various forms of abuse — emotional, physical, sexual
and financial. “This male belief system coupled with a poor ability to
regulate their own emotions provides the vulnerability for an immature and
violent expression when they feel angry or rejected,” he said. Willows added that such immaturity is evident in the
explanations of perpetrators that “She made me angry”, “She was making a fool
out of me”, and “She would not listen to me”. “These and similar thoughts help relieve the perpetrator of
personal responsibility and provide justification for their behaviour ...” Willows said answers to the difficult but important question
as to how to prevent such violence lie within our understanding of how such
thoughts and poor controls have developed. “This violence is but one manifestation within a society
that seems to condone violence as a legitimate response whenever one feels
aggrieved or entitled ... We demonstrate an inconsistent and ambivalent opinion
of violence, seemingly condoning it in some situations but condemning it in others.
This inconsistent message causes doubt in the minds of women and children as to
how their pleas will be heard and so silence becomes their less risky option,”
he said. He said the fact that our society is also one in which
absent fathers are so prevalent, means that boys are not disciplined in
managing their emotions through modelling and instruction. Willows said prevention and early reporting will therefore
depend on a consistent message that is taught in homes and schools from an
early age that violence is wrong and that disrespect of others will always have
consequences. Encounter of an abuse survivor A local woman, who is one of the lucky few who are able to
get out of abusive relationships, shared her past experiences with Weekend
Witness. “When he hit me, he said it was because I didn’t listen to
him and I would go out drinking when he specifically told me he didn’t want me
going out drinking as he doesn’t date women who drink. I told him he wasn’t
going to tell me what to do and how to live my life because he’s not my father;
I asked him why he went out drinking and I couldn’t. He responded with a slap
and said he’s doing my family a favour as I am ungovernable. “He also accused me of cheating on him, but he was expecting
his second child with another woman while we were together. “When he hit me, I felt so weak and helpless; all of the
things I said would never happen to me, happened that evening. I’m an educated
young woman, I’m clever ... I’ve accomplished so many things in my life, and I
am amongst the women who got hit by their partner. “I won’t lie to you, even telling this story is
embarrassing. I’ve never told all of it; how he pinned my hands with his knees
and sat on my chest slapping me until I managed to get my hands free and push
him off me. I kept apologising but he didn’t stop. I’ve never told of how he
forced himself on me and said he would slap me again if I didn’t have sex with
him. “Only a few friends of mine know, but no family member knows
because I’m afraid I will be judged. I’ve been raped twice actually. I never
told anyone about the other incident because I was the one who visited the guy.
I told him ‘no’ but he forced himself on me anyways, so I still feel partially
responsible ... “I tell myself all the time that all these violent acts were
never my fault, but only if I had just stayed at home, none of it would’ve
happened. I’m an independent young woman, but I’m not sure how strong I am
anymore; my dignity and pride were stripped away by two men. “I always thought I was going to be the one to break the
cycle of women abuse at home because all my sisters [cousins included] have
been beaten by their partners. My aunt was the worst example because she kept
going back to her husband who would drag her out by her legs onto the street in
front of people, beat her up with an iron in front her children, but still she
never left him until she died of natural causes a few years ago. “When I managed to break up with him I hated him for a very
long time. He has apologised a couple of times and I would like to believe I
have forgiven him but every time I would re-live that evening, it made me
really angry. “I’m a graduate now, things are moving in the right
direction, but I cannot seem to fall in love again. I’m not sure if it has
anything to do with the abusive past but I can’t trust men anymore,” she said. These are just some of the recent intimate femicide
incidents reported by the media: • On Mother’s Day, an Edendale Hospital nurse Ntombizodwa
Charlotte Dlamini (40), was shot and killed by her prison warder husband, Sipho
Dlamini in Bisley. The warder later shot himself in the head after a six-hour
standoff with more than 20 police officers. They are survived by two sons aged
eight and 11 years old. • Last month, Northdale man Nathen Rampersad (30), allegedly
poured petrol over his girlfriend (17) and set her alight after she refused to
clean his room. The teenager survived with serious injuries. Rampersad has been
remanded in custody until May 28 after being referred to a district surgeon for
him to be assessed to determine if he is mentally stable. • Quantity surveying Mangosuthu University of Technology
(MUT) student Zolile Khumalo (21) was allegedly shot dead by ex-boyfriend
Thabani Mzolo (23) at her Lonsdale residence this month. Mzolo is set to appear
again in court on June 19 for a formal bail application. • Sandile Mantsoe was found guilty of killing his
ex-girlfriend Karabo Mokoena. Mantsoe stabbed Mokoena and tried to hide the
murder by burning her remains. Mokoena’s charred remains were found by a
passer-by in Lyndhurst, Johannesburg in April 2017. Mantsoe was recently
sentenced to an effective 32 years behind bars. • Durban North woman Siam Lee (20) was abducted from an
alleged Durban North brothel on January 4 this year. Her charred body was
discovered on a farm in New Hanover in the Midlands two days later. An Assagay
businessman faces numerous charges including the kidnapping of Lee and the rape
of another woman. • Police constable Doctor Sipho Chonco (32) allegedly shot
dead his long-term partner Wendy Dlamini in Northdale in April this year. His
case was been adjourned to May 24. • In late 2016, a Pietermaritzburg police officer was
allegedly beaten to death with a pick handle by her boyfriend. Sergeant
Thabisile Penelope Zondi (41) was severely assaulted, suffering multiple blows
to the body and face. • In early 2017, a woman and her relative were left fighting
for their lives after being shot, allegedly by the woman’s boyfriend, who then
turned the gun on himself. The shooting occurred in the parking lot at the
Public Works Department in Pietermaritzburg. 