Dolphins coach Grant Morgan is thrilled to have
Pietermaritzburg-born Proteas batsman David Miller back in his team, after
confirming the 28-year-old player’s move for next season. Miller, currently playing for Kings XI Punjab in the Indian
Premier League, started his career with the Dolphins in 2008, before leaving
them to join the Knights two years ago. “Ja, that’s positive. He will be joining us for next
season,” said an excited Morgan about Miller’s decision to rejoin the Durban
franchise on Wednesday. During his time with the Dolphins, Miller was one of the key
players who led the side to the RAM SLAM T2O Challenge title, beating Cape
Cobras in the 2014 final. In the 2016/17 season, the player won the Sunfoil Series
title with the Knights, and coach Morgan will be hoping that the batsman will
boost their mission to bring back happy days in Durban. “He is a match-winner and he has proven himself at
international level in all formats of the game. He was probably the main reason
that the Knights won their four-day trophy and he did well last season again,”
said Morgan. Miller, as a Proteas contracted player, gets to choose which
franchise he plays for. Morgan said they were happy that Miller had chosen to play
for them, as he could have joined any franchise in the country since he’s a top
player. “I’m sure all the guys in the team, even the management,
probably whispered in his ear to come back and join us, but it was his
decision,” said Morgan. “Also, he’s got his mother and father based here in the
province, so I think it was his decision to come back, but actually all of us
would have whispered in his ear because he is a Durban guy, he spent his life here
and belongs in Natal.” Miller joins KwaZulu-Natal Inland cricket team fast bowler
Kerwin Mungroo, who has been handed a professional contract by the Durban
franchise. Morgan said they are not going to be adding any other
members to the squad as he believes they now have enough talent in their
system, which included players from semi-professional teams Inland and KZN
Coastal. “The fact that we won three trophies across our teams last
season shows that there is enough talent around our squad,” he explained.