After police tracked down an armed prison warder who gunned down his wife in front of her family on Sunday, a six-hour standoff ensued which ended with the warder shooting himself. Meanwhile, the father of the slain woman on Monday recounted the terror he and his family had endured as they watched their son-in-law hunt down and kill his daughter in front of him, his wife, his son and daughter-in-law. “He was like a madman,” he said Ntombizodwa Charlotte Dlamini (40), a nurse at Edendale Hospital, was shot and killed by her prison warder husband, Sipho Dlamini at her mother’s home in Bisley, on Mother’s Day. It is alleged that the couple had been having issues in the days before the shooting. He had allegedly beaten her the day before. After the shooting, Dlamini fled in his car to the Richmond/Eston Road where police eventually tracked him down at 5 pm on Sunday afternoon. An eye witness to the six-hour standoff, who asked not to be named, said the man was in his prison warden uniform during the ordeal and armed with his private pistol. The source said Dlamini stood behind his vehicle 40m away from police who had their guns trained on him throughout the six hours. “Dlamini said he had been a prison warder for 27 years and was not prepared to go to prison as he had seen what goes on inside the prison system.” “He said he regretted shooting his wife but did not know how to fix things other than by ending his life.” At one point Dlamini said he did not have the nerve to shoot himself. “It was thought that he might tried to fire shots at the police so police would retaliate and do the job for him. The source said at times it seemed the situation had calmed down and then it would escalate again. A negotiator was eventually brought in to try and stop Dlamini pulling the trigger, but the drama ended when he suddenly shot himself in the head in front of more than 20 police officers at around 11 pm. Speaking to The Witness on Monday, Ntombizodwa’s father, Lot Ntuli (72) said he was “destroyed” by his daughters death. He said the couple were married for 12 years but their relationship was strained lately with Ntombizodwa spending two weeks at a psychiatric institution for stress management related to their marriage in March. She’d been advised by psychologists to spend a few days away from her husband. On Sunday she went to work but was sent home after colleagues saw bruises on her body and she was seen by a doctor. She had admitted to him that Sipho was “beating her”. When the warden learned where his wife was, he had rushed to the house. “He came into the lounge where I was sitting with my son, daughter-in-law, daughter and wife. There was food set out because we thought we would have a nice big family lunch for Mother’s Day but that didn’t happen.” Ntuli said he asked Dlamini if he had beaten Ntombizodwa and he admitted he had. “I said that the meeting was finished and that Sipho needed to get his parents so we could have a family meeting and try and sort this all out.” He said because his daughter was afraid the family had locked her into a bedroom while they continued talking. Dlamini suddenly stood up, pulled out his gun and screamed, “you are making a fool out of me”. Dlamini had sprinted down the passage, kicked in the door to the bedroom and shot his daughter once in the neck and in the abdomen. “He was like a madman. After he shot her he just ran out and left,” he said. “I had to watch police carry my daughter to the mortuary van and then she was gone.” Ntuli said the entire family was traumatised by the ordeal and that it would take them all years to heal. He said his daughter and Dlamini left behind two young boys aged eight and 11.  Edendale Hospital nurse Ntombizodwa Charlotte Dlamini (40) who was shot dead in front of her parents on Mother’s Day.PHOTO: KZN Department of Health Ntuli said Ntombizodwa’s funeral would be held this Saturday but a venue is still to be confirmed.