A Pietermaritzburg-born woman is to star in one of South
Africa’s most loved television soapies. Rosa Anthony (30) is set to play Seline van Staden on
Isidingo, starting on Wednesday. Anthony grew up in Woodlands and attended Woodlands Primary
and Clarendon Primary, then went to Pietermaritzburg Girls’ High School (GHS). She said she has fond memories of her childhood here and
remembers spending her Saturday mornings at a friend’s mother’s stall at a flea
market in Church Street and going to the main library in the afternoons. Anthony has been in the theatre and performance industry
since 2011 after she graduated from the University of Cape Town with a
bachelor’s degree in Theatre and Performance, majoring in acting for stage and film. “It all started at an early age, when I developed an
interest in the performing arts and being able to tell stories and it got real
when I got to GHS,” she said. “The school had a great drama department with a phenomenal
teacher, Mrs Jane Howes, and she pushed me and encouraged me to play a range of
characters at an early age. “She never allowed me to say I can’t do this or this is too
difficult for me.” Anthony said she could not believe it when her agent called
to tell her she would play the new female role on Isidingo. “To be honest it hasn’t settled in yet. “As an actress you go for so many castings and auditions,
that you don’t always expect to land the role,” she said. Anthony said there is a huge difference between herself and
her character (Seline), except for a few similarities. “Seline and I are career-driven and we make a good team with
our husbands and we genuinely care for other people,” she said. “Since graduating, this is a big role for me because
although Seline is so much fun, she is also a challenge in terms of her
complexity.” Before Isidingo Anthony played the Mexican girlfriend to
James Corden’s character on the hit BBC mini-seriesThe Wrong Mans. She said
other SA television work includes e.TV’s Rhythm City, SABC 1’s Task Force and she
was the third runner-up in SABC 1’s acting competition Class Act. Anthony’s mother, Cynthia Whitcher, said the actress is and
will always be the family’s baby. “She was popular with her school friends, particularly young
girls who came from a similar background,” said Whitcher. “My family and I are so happy and proud that she has this
opportunity to be on Isidingo. As a mother, it warms my heart to see the people
of Pietermaritzburg supporting my child and wishing the best for her,” she
added. Howes, who now teaches drama at The Wykeham Collegiate, said
it is wonderful to see one of her pupils living their dream. “Not many students get the opportunity to carry on with
their drama and they have to work very hard to make it. It is delightful that
she persevered and made it,” said Howes. “To those who want to go into the performance industry, it
is not an easy industry to break into. You have to persevere and keep going.
Even if you don’t get a star role, keep going if you really want to do it,” she
said.