 Wedding bells are in the air at New Prison for jailbird
Morné Croeser’s wedding to the woman he was cheating with when he murdered his
wife. Tying the knot in the high security state facility is
somewhat unusual, said prison sources, with one recalling the last being
several years ago. Croeser, a former dog handler with the Mountain Rise dog
unit was sentenced to 23 years’ imprisonment, which was reduced to 18 years on
appeal, for killing his wife Erika. It happened at their home in the Mzinsi
Game Reserve in Albert Falls on August 28, 2010. Croeser started serving the sentence in 2014 after the
appeal. A legal expert said that having regard to when he was
sentenced, Croeser has to serve about five years or more before he is released
on parole. The trial court had heard evidence that the couple had a
stormy relationship and that Croeser had an affair with Ruth Sinclair, a local
school teacher. Erika had threatened to divorce him and had applied for a
protection order against him after he threatened to kill anyone who tried to
take his two children away from him. Prison spokesperson, Thulani Mdluli, confirmed this week
that Croeser’s application to get married has been granted. However, he did not divulge the date saying that matrimonial
activities for offenders take place under very strict security because they
involve an external audience which, if not observed accordingly, “can
compromise security and place other people’s lives at risk”. Mdluli added that permission was only granted following
security checks for Croeser and his spouse. “Other information concerning the wedding is strictly not
consented to the public,” he said. Sinclair’s ex-husband Pierre van Rensburg said on Friday
that he was not “particularly happy about the wedding”. He has two children
with her. Her father Richard Sinclair said he did not know about the
wedding until told by Weekend Witness. He did not wish to comment. Erika’s twin brother Francois Schafer said, “We wish them
luck with their marriage. Let them be as happy as what my sister was”. Several attempts to contact Sinclair were unsucessful. On her Facebook page, in 2015 she posted “Morné I’m yours.
One day closer. I love you”. She also posted a photograph of a man’s stomach with a tatoo
of her name inscribed on it. During Croeser’s trial Sinclair had testified that she was
involved in an “on and off” extramarital relationship with Croeser from March
2009. She said that after they started a relationship, Croeser moved in with
her for two weeks in October that year and again for three weeks in November
2009. The trial court found that he had staged a robbery at his
home and stabbed himself in the stomach to try to mislead police. The knife,
which missed all major organs and nerves, was still embedded in his abdomen
when paramedics arrived. Erika was stabbed 14 times in the face and neck. The policeman had pleaded not guilty, claiming he and Erika
were attacked by an intruder after they returned home from a bar early that
morning. 