The Pietermaritzburg high court yesterday ordered that two alleged land invaders be arrested and brought to court. The order was obtained at the request of a fearful landowner, Gregory Goodall, and his wife, Alice. In terms of it the sheriff of the court and police have been instructed by the court to arrest Norman Nicky Gcabashe and a woman only known as Mrs S. Khumalo. They are then to be brought to court to explain why they should not be held in contempt and jailed. The two have allegedly gone against an order obtained by the Goodalls, who are the trustees of Wingrove farm. It was granted in March. That order stops Gcabashe, Khumalo and anyone else from invading the land and the duo from selling off plots. Gregory Goodall said in an affidavit that on April 14, Gcabashe trespassed on the farm accompanied by David Msomi, of the Economic Freedom Fighters in the uMgungundlovu District. He told Msomi that the land belonged to him and that Gcabashe was running a scam by selling sites of his land. Msomi said he did not want to have anything to do with the matter. After Gcabashe left, signs he erected saying “private property” and “no trespassing” were destroyed. The next day both the suspects trespassed and a heated “altercation” ensued with them and Goodall who then left the area in fear for his life. Later that day, he was told by a tenant that the trespassers threatened him and his family’s lives, saying they would take over the farm. Goodall said there were various other unlawful incidents such as intimidation. He reported them to police. Since then various people had trespassed. Despite being show the court order, they continue. Goodall added that he even dug a trench across the road the trespassers were using to access the farm but this did not help. Instead, the trespassers filled up the trench. “During one conversation ... I was accused of being racist and also told that the farm would ultimately be taken over entirely.” He said he reported the threats to police and the municipality. On April 30, various people trespassed on the farm. They removed all of the remaining fencing he had erected to prevent them accessing the farm. The trespassers placed a large amount of barbed wire across an access road to the farm. “After it became dark, my son, Daniel Goodall, was driving on that access road and drove into the barbed wire. He immediately stopped his vehicle and noticed in his side mirror several men approaching his vehicle. “He managed to reverse his vehicle out of the barbed wire and onto the R56 to escape.” Goodall added that there is nothing he can do except ask the court to intervene. He has reported the various incidents to police and informed the municipality but nothing has been done.