A local ward councillor and murder accused alleges that police investigating the murder of ANC activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu were “taking sides politically” and not doing their jobs properly. Nkosinathi “TK” Gambu further stated in the Pietermaritzburg regional court on Thursday that the police were taking instructions from Police Minister Bheki Cele, who in turn was being instructed by President Cyril Ramaphosa. He added that following his arrest, he has gathered from talking to police that they have a list of people who they want to have arrested for Mchunu’s murder. Gambu was explaining to magistrate Sello Maboee why he believes that he, his cousin Gift Zungu, Nkanyiso Zimu, Sifiso Mbele, Mlungisi Zimu and Ayanda Ngubane were arrested and why they should be released on bail. He said that he and the men belong to the NDZ (Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma) faction and this could be a reason why they were arrested. He added the arrests were an attempt to weaken this faction. Gambu said there were a number of reasons Mchunu could have been killed because he had “offended” many people when he was alive. He said Mchunu did not have the same opinion as the region. “He was always protesting against the ANC regional leadership, it was untrustworthy. He was often toyi-toyiing ... when he used to arrive at municipal offices he would talk about the deployment of officials,” said Gambu. He also said that the mayor and deputy mayor of Msunduzi Municipality were a “bad influence”. He added that Mchunu was crusading about the awarding of tenders. He said in May, when Mchunu was killed, his name and the names of his co-accused were being bandied around as “the killers”. Despite their knowing this, none of them absconded because they were “not connected to the murder”. If granted bail, he added that he did not foresee the possibility of their lives being in danger. He said he has no problem staying at an alternate address. Asked by his advocate, Jerome Braun, SC, to comment about a petition signed by more than 40 people opposing bail, Gambu said there will always be people for and against them. Given the opportunity, he will be able to get more signatures of people who want them to get bail, he said. Gambu also said that he will not interfere with state witnesses because he wants them to come to court and be exposed for telling lies by implicating him and his co-accused in Mchunu’s murder. The bail application has been postponed to Tuesday when Gambu is expected to be cross-examined.