A 49-year-old  woman who practiced as a sangoma was stabbed to death at her upmarket house in the Table Mountain area on Wednesday morning. Bathabile Sithole was stabbed multiple times and her body was found by her domestic worker. Sources told The Witness that Sithole was stabbed more than 10 times in her head and neck before her attackers fled the scene and left her to die. Police believe the attack happened between 6.30 am and 7.30 am yesterday morning. Mountain Rise police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said police estimated the time of the attack based on the fact that Sithole’s son Bono, who lived at home, had left his mother’s house for work at 6.30 am. Ebrahim said Sithole’s body was found at 7.30 am. It is believed that Sithole’s domestic worker saw two women enter the property on Wednesday morning and then later saw them leaving. It is unclear at what time the women left, but when the domestic worker went to check on Sithole she found her dead. It has been alleged that scores of South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) grant beneficiary cards were found in Sithole’s house — raising questions — but police would not officially confirm this. The motive for the murder remains a mystery. When The Witness visited Sithole’s home yesterday, dozens of mourning family members could be seen huddling together around the entrance to the two-storey home in the cold and rain. Women could be heard crying hysterically inside the home, while most of the men stood outside, waiting to hear from police on what to do next. The luxurious two-storey house with balconies and a double garage stood out, surrounded mostly by smaller homes including mud houses and shacks. Sithole’s son, Bono, was standing against one of the walls to the house in the rain when The Witness arrived. Still dressed in his work clothes, Bono stood with family members, eyes downcast. Bono confirmed he had left for work at 6.30 am from his mother’s house and just an hour later he was told his mother had been killed. He immediately returned home. He did not want to make any further comment. Ebrahim said no arrests had been made at this stage and that investigations are under way. A case of murder has been opened at the Bishopstowe police station.