Businessman Rajivee Soni was stoney-faced as he was handed
an effective 30-year jail term for the murder of Pietermaritzburg doctor
Bhavish Sewram on Friday. Soni was not as upbeat as he has characteristically been
throughout his long trial and he looked anxious ahead of the sentencing.
Physically he was much the same, though his hair was closely shaven after
having spent the past few weeks mainly in the prison hospital following his
conviction. However, he shook hands and hugged family members soon after
he arrived for his sentencing. This is not yet the end of the road for Soni as his legal
team prepares to apply for leave to appeal against his conviction and sentence,
with the application provisionally set down for November 21. Sewram was shot dead outside his surgery in May 2013 by
people Soni had hired. Sewram’s wife, Yuvadia, said after the sentencing — which
took place inside a crammed courtroom — that no punishment will bring her
husband back. “He [Soni] brought this upon himself through his cowardice
and ego. It is very sad that his family and innocent children have to suffer
the consequences of his evil actions,” she said. She added that Soni (42) will properly get out of jail when
he is over 70 years old. “The sentence is fitting for the crime,” she said. Sewram’s dad, Parmanand, said he was “quite disappointed”
that Soni did not get life. “The loss of a child through a despicable deed is a loss
that can never be overcome,” he said. Nevertheless, he and his family thanked the investigating
team and state advocate Johan du Toit for their excellent work. He also thanked the community for their support and
encouragement from the time his son was killed. Judge Jacqueline Henriques said that she was of the view
that imposing the life sentence for the murder would be “disproportionate and
unjust” having considered all the factors placed before her. Her duty was to
balance all the factors to come to a just sentence, she said, Of the murder, she said it was premeditated. She added that the defeating the ends of justice charges
formed part of a scheme by Soni and the people he had hired, to “humiliate and
degrade” the doctor. It took place over 18 months and Soni had sufficient time
to put the past behind him. This is why she dismissed suggestions by the
defence team that this was “a crime of passion”. She said that many lives were adversely affected by the
murder — the families of Soni and Sewram. The judge considered in his favour that he was a first-time
offender, once a useful member of society, and relatively young. She ordered that a social worker visit Soni’s two children
and submit reports to the court if the children are in need of care and
protection. She also recommended that Correctional Services take note of
a report that the children should have contact with Soni. Of Soni’s “health issues”, namely hypertension and
depression, the judge said she was satisfied that there was sufficient
treatment available in prison. Should his condition deteriorate, he could apply
for medical parole. In considering defence submissions that Soni was the
“primary caregiver” of his daughter, the judge said that Soni’s ex-wife,
Kerusha, could take care of her and their other child. She also said Soni’s
family could also step in and assist in taking care of them. “I have no doubt
the children will be cared for,” she said. Judge Henriques was critical of the fact that Soni had not
shown any remorse but said that although this is not aggravating, it would have
shown that he appreciated the loss of life, especially as he and Sewram used to
be friends. 