Have a glass of water. Not before, not after, but instead. That’s the contraceptive advice women used to give their
daughters many years ago, before the Pill revolutionised the way we prevented
having babies and allowed us to enjoy less fraught sex lives. During a recent trip to the mall I chuckled as I remembered
this while admiring a really expensive outfit. I thought that advice could
equally apply to impulse buys in the current economic climate, where we end up
having to spend heaps of money on things we wish we didn’t have to, instead of
the things we really want. I left the outfit where it was and scarpered out of
that particular shop. Many of us felt the petrol price increase this week as a
particularly unpleasant punch in the gut. I winced because it kicked in as I
was planning a little road trip spanning three provinces. If you’re anything
like me, you resent the huge amount of money your tank sucks in each month.
Fortunately, my ride is a little car that’s pretty modest about her drinking
habits. But, as the price of petrol rises, many of us have to do without
something to work the hundreds of rands we spend on the liquid gold into our
budgets. This may mean one fewer meal out a month for example, or at the very
least, that much less you manage to save for your retirement each month. And the thing about petrol is that you have nothing to show
for the 600 bucks give or take you forked out for it, really. It’s in your
tank, but you don’t take it out from time to time to admire its golden hues or
sense-assaulting scent. You don’t show it off proudly to your friends. It hides
away, lurking where no one can see it. It evaporates too fast and as you watch
your tank drain dry and the needle barely rising on your dashboard, you may
start to dread the next inevitable visit to the petrol station. Especially if
it falls around month-end. Other begrudging buys for me are the huge amount we have to
spend on household cleaning products every month. It’s a massive rip-off but we
have to buy these products to be sanitary. Our homes would be grubby and sticky
without them. Many of the cheaper versions of the big household names are so
watered down that it’s hardly worth getting those so we end up paying the big
bucks for things as arbitrary as bathroom cleaning products and toilet cleaner;
you may as well flush that money down the loo. Data is another begrudging buy, because it’s ethereal and
doesn’t exist as a palpable thing. “Oh look everyone. Admire my wonderful data.
It cost me a small fortune. But it will be gone in no time at all.” If you’ve
ever had a weekend away from your Wi-Fi, and seen how fast your data gets
chowed, you’ll know what I mean. But we have to have it to be functional people
nowadays and so we pay. Through our noses. I also resent paying big bucks for things that don’t last as
long as they’re worth. How about R525 for a root touch up at the hairdresser
and a month later, you need to go back to keep your silver halo at bay, because
damn it, you’re just vain. For R525, I expect it at least to last six months.
When are they going to invent that pill that stops from us going grey? If they
do, I hope it’s cheap. And none of it’s going to get better any time soon. In a few
years’ time I suppose we’ll all be saying to each other: “Hey, remember when
petrol cost less than R50 a litre?” Maybe by then, we’ll all have solar-powered
hover crafts with free Wi-Fi. Here’s hoping.