As ANC internal battles threaten to bring municipalities within the Moses Mabhida region to their knees, newly-appointed ANC interim leader in the region Thulani Xulu believes uniting the party was the answer to the current woes. Speaking during an exclusive interview with The Witness, Xulu, who has a wealth of experience in local government, said it would be difficult to turn around municipalities as long as the ANC in the region remained divided. “You will not be able to address the negative things currently reported on about the municipalities unless you first deal with the problem of factions within the ANC,” he said. “As the ANC regional task team (RTT) in the Moses Mabhida region our main task is to stop the infighting within the ANC. One of the things that the divisions within the ANC have done is to drive out experienced people, creating instability.” A former Msunduzi Municipality executive council member, Xulu was last week appointed by the ANC provincial executive committee (PEC) to serve as the convener of the RTT that will preside over the region until the next regional conference, scheduled to take place after next year’s national general elections. Xulu, who supported President Cyril Ramaphosa during the build-up to the ANC presidential race against former AU chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, believes the divisions within the party will soon be a thing of the past. “The positive part about everything we have been through in the region is that people learnt some lessons. People can now understand that a divided ANC means poor service delivery in municipalities and many other problems. “Because of that, it won’t be difficult for branches in the region to work with the RTT in building unity within the ANC to make it possible for us to fix problems currently faced by our municipalities,” he said. However, Xulu, who was born and raised in Caluza, is aware that not everyone within the ANC in the region supports the RTT and what the new leadership is trying to achieve. ANC members in the region opposed to Xulu and his RTT team disrupted a meeting that was held in Pietermaritzburg on Saturday and that had been called to introduce the new leadership to the party’s branches. On Monday, ANC members boycotted meetings in Msunduzi and Impendle intended to introduce the new leadership to ANC supporters in the two sub-regions. While Xulu conceded that there have been some early hiccups, he dismissed them as “isolated incidents”. “Out of all the six sub-regions where the RTT members were introduced to ANC members by the PEC, it was only in Msunduzi and Impendle where the turnout was not satisfactory. As for Saturday’s meeting, it was only a small group of people that we believe were bused in that created chaos,” he said. Xulu, who served on the ANC provincial task team that prepared the party for the July elective conference where the current PEC was elected, believes that the experience he gained while serving in the PTT will come in handy in his new role. “When we started there were these sharp divisions within the PTT, but as time went on members realised that the ANC in the province will be wiped out of the KZN landscape unless we found one another,” he said. “In the end, common sense prevailed, with members of the PTT resolving to put the ANC first. I have no doubt that given the calibre of the people in the current RTT, the task of uniting the region and ensuring a resounding victory for the ANC in next year’s elections will be fulfilled.” On the ANC–led Msunduzi Municipality service delivery chaos, accompanied by corruption and maladministration, Xulu was adamant that the new leadership will clean up the mess. “The RTT, alongside the PEC, will definitely bring about order and stability, not only in the Msunduzi Municipality but across all municipalities within the Moses Mabhida region,” he said.