One of Pietermaritzburg’s top matric achievers last year, Kiara Singh, was laid to rest on Tuesday after she and two of her friends were involved in a car accident a week ago. The 19-year-old former Carter High School pupil, who had passed her Grade 12 exams with seven distinctions, had been in the intensive care unit at St Anne’s hospital for the whole of last week and died on Friday. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane said it was alleged that on Friday, October 19 at around 2 pm, a VW Polo was travelling on the N3 northbound near the Liberty Midlands Mall off-ramp when it collided with a truck. “The driver and two passengers sustained injuries and were taken to hospital for medical attention. The circumstances surrounding the incident are being investigated,” he said. Zwane told The Witness that a case of reckless and negligent driving was being investigated by Pietermaritzburg police. Another source alleged that the Polo had stopped in the middle of the road and that the truck failed to apply brakes on time and crashed into the car. Carter High School principal Ashwin Ramgoolam said the teen’s death was a huge loss as she was one of the school’s top achievers last year. “She had matriculated with seven distinctions last year and was currently studying mechanical engineering at the University of KwaZulu-Natal. “She was a gentle soul with an amazing sense of positivity. Her death is a huge loss to everyone who knew her,” said Ramgoolam. Attempts to get in contact with Singh’s family were unsuccessful on Tuesday. Commenting on the Carter High Face­book page, Nancy Moon wrote: “What a devastating loss, rest easy young lady. May your family find peace, you are flying high now.” Yvette Goosen Smith wrote: “Sincere condolences to the family. What a beautiful, gifted young lady. Rip dearest Kiara.” She wanted to wanted to focus on developing SA In January, The Witness published an article featuring Singh and her mother as part of the coverage of top matric achievers. Singh’s mother had missed calls from the newspaper informing her daughter that she was among the city’s top achievers and had asked that The Witness interview her the next day. Singh had told The Witness that she was “delighted” by her results. She said being a developing country, South Africa has issues regarding infrastructure and she would have liked to be part of improving that. “In the short term I aspire to getting my degree and I would also like to contribute to the empowerment of the youth and women of this country,” said Singh.