After a lengthy battle against its criminalisation, dagga
has finally stepped out of the shadows and into the mainstream. Usually whispered about in hushed tones and smoked in dark
corners, dagga is taking centre stage as lobbyists and academics scramble to
find out more about the medicinal benefits of the plant. While you can now grow your dagga in peace without being
harassed by police, experts say that the only thing that makes dagga a medicine
is the user, not the grower. A better understanding of its benefits and risks, as well as
the law, is necessary to make an informed decision. If it is a medical remedy you are considering, Krithi
Thaver, founder of Canna Culture and chair of the KZN branch of the Cannabis
Development Council of SA, advises that the first step is a discussion with
your doctor to establish if a marijuana-derived remedy is for you. “Also, there are different varieties of marijuana and you
must ensure you are using the correct one for your ailments as incorrect
medicine can do more harm than good,” he said. “We encourage everybody to start growing their own medicines
to take care of their family’s health needs. Cannabis is able to treat and cure
many conditions, so it’s imperative that everybody start growing their own.” According to Thaver, with proper education on the type of
seeds to plant, what method one is using to grow, and how to dry and use it
properly as a treatment, it can be extremely effective. He also stated that, since the ConCourt ruling, cannabis
equipment suppliers around the country have been sold out, saying: “This is
only going to get bigger and bigger. “There are over 50 variants of oils to treat specific
conditions. That’s the science behind cannabis oils. It’s important to select
the right oil with a proper diet plan to treat a number of conditions
effectively. They are also a variety of growing options one can consider.”  Krithi Thaver in the cannabis dispensary in Durban North. So, what are the health benefits of cannabis? What ailments
is it able to treat from the elderly to the young? Thaver said cannabis creates homeostasis, which in a
nutshell means it brings about balance in the body. “Every mammal is born with an endocannabinoid system which
takes cares of everything the body does, from the way you walk to the way you
talk. “By controlling this endocannabinoid sytem using cannabis,
you can keep your body healthy without usage of toxic pharmaceutical drugs.
From young to old, with no side effect, it’s the reason why it was such a
well-guarded secret for a such a long time,” Thaver said. A local man who has for a long time been advocating for the
legalisation of dagga, who asked to remain unnamed, said he used it as a
treatment option for his attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). “I really struggle to sit in one place for a long period of
time. It helps me to focus. I teach yoga as well and it lends itself to those
kinds of meditative practices of nature.” The man said the seeds he consumes in the form of tea and
edibles are from Lesotho and Swaziland. “I make sure that I stay very close to my source. I don’t
work with people who don’t grow their own cannabis. I need to know the
conditions under which they were grown.” Rastafarian Mpho Hadebe (35), from Willowfountain, agreed
that dagga was good for medicinal use. “We don’t only smoke dagga here — we also use it when we get
sick. For instance, when you have chest pain, you boil dagga with water as if
you are making tea out of it.” “Then you drink that dagga tea and, in no time, you feel
your chest opening up and become alive again,” he said. Jah Hadebe said he was happy that the court had finally
realised that there was nothing wrong with the plant. “The only thing that should be criminalized is alcohol
because that is what is killing the nation,” he said. “Dagga is good – even if you smoke it, you don’t think about
going out and hurting someone. All you are concerned with is what you are going
to eat because it makes you hungry,” said Hadebe. He said he did not grow dagga himself, but bought it
whenever he wanted to smoke it. “I am going to start my small garden soon. I used to grow
dagga for private use, but I had to stop because I was scared of the police.
Now there is nothing stopping me,” said A recent report by the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine said there was evidence that cannabis or
cannabinoids, which are found in the marijuana plant, could be an effective
treatment for chronic pain. This is by far the most common reason people request medical
marijuana, the report reads. Dr Asafika Mbangata, who works at the Community-Oriented
Substance Use Program, said cannabis preparations were obtained from the hemp
plant cannabis sativa. “Cannabis sativa contains more than 400 chemicals, of which
about 60 are psychoactive cannabinoids, one of a class of diverse chemical
compounds that acts on cannabinoid receptors in cells that alter
neurotransmitter release in the brain,” said Mbangata. She said there were two types of dagga, 9-THC or
9-tetrahydrocannabinol, which is dagga that gives you a high. Its effects kick
in within minutes after smoking or consumption and may last from five to 24
hours.  CBD, also known as cannabidiol dagga, that impacts the
central nervous system without the high, is used for medicinal purposes. Relief of chronic neuropathic pain, such as from multiple
sclerosis, HIV-associated sensory neuropathy, cancer, chronic alcohol use and
rheumatoid arthritis, is among the research-proven benefits of marijuana. Mbangata said cannabis could also be used as an appetite
stimulant. What does the law say? If you are getting high off your own supply, the law has
almost-fully got your back. I say almost because, well, the law still needs to
be properly written. All we learned from the Constitutional Court ruling was that
much of the new legislation must be decided by government. There are still no exact amounts that have been set as the
legal possession limit. Blow by blow information on cannabis What are Cannabis Seeds? According to the Medical Cannabis Seed Bank website,
cannabis is a dioecious plant which means that the male and female reproductive
organs are found in separate individuals. The most sought-after bud produced by cannabis is referred
to as “sinsemilla”. This seedless flower is the result of growing female
cannabis plants in an area without males, thus creating a high potency bud. Feminised seeds? Feminised seeds are created by causing a hermaphrodite
condition in the female cannabis plant. To get yourself a hermi female, you can
try one of the following methods: • Spray the plant with a solution of colloidal silver. • Spray the plant with gibberellic acid (very uncommon). • Use the Rodelization method (whereby the female plant is
stressed into producing both male and female flowers). Feminised seeds will produce plants that are almost
identical to the self-pollinated female parent. This is because only one set of
genes exists and so no males will be produced. Auto-flowering seeds? When your growing cannabis plant begins to receive 12 hours
(or less) of light a day, it will start to flower. Sativa and Indica plants will flower based on the photoperiod
and regardless of age or height. However, Cannabis ruderalis will begin
flowering once the plant reaches a certain age and does not depend on a change
of light. This low-THC species has opened up new doors for cannabis breeders.
By crossing the ruderalis plant with more potent varieties we get
auto-flowering strains. These strains produce Sativa, Indica, or hybrid cannabis
that will start producing bud as soon as they reach maturity. These
auto-flowering strains are especially sought after in northern climates where
summers are short and cold. Cannabis seeds vs cannabis clones A clone is a simple cutting taken from a plant that is
placed into a growth medium to promote root growth. Once the cutting has
rooted, it can be grown into a mature plant that will be genetically identical
to the plant it was cut from. On the other hand, seeds carry the genetic make-up of both
its parent plants. These traits can be expressed in a variety of ways. Some
plants characteristics will come from the mother and some from the father;
others can show traits from both. How much does cannabis oil cost? Prices differ depending on where you get it. On average, the price paid for cannabis oil in South Africa
ranges from R450 per gram up to R1 000+ per gram. A gram might not sound like
much but, in most cases, if the oil is a good product, a gram will last you
much longer than you think. With one gram of cannabis oil you can easily medicate 12 to
24 brownies. Buying cannabis seeds When it comes to buying cannabis seeds, things are different
all over the world. In the U.K. there is a loophole in the law that allows you
to purchase seeds as a “novelty” item. Here in SA, there are local online
distributors that you can purchase from. When you order seeds online, always be sure to use reputable
sources. On average, the price paid for cannabis seeds in South Africa ranges
from R900 for five seeds to R1800 for 10 seeds. Recreational and medicinal use Medicinal use is strictly in relation to tending or
alleviating an ailment or disease. This can refer to many forms of consumption
and use, from external and internal oils, to consuming cannabis based edibles,
droplets and teas. Recreational use is purely for the effect of
tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC, which provides the user with a “high” feeling
similar to that of consuming alcohol. Medical cannabis isn’t for everyone According to Gad Avnon, founder and pro­gramme di­rec­tor of
Har­mony Re­treat, much of the damage associated with dagga use is done in the
psychological aspect of personal developments. “The users will not be motivated, and their cognitive
capacity will be drastically impaired. Schoolwork will be of poor quality,
which in turn will affect their future. In more severe cases a psychotic
condition will occur, which could easily generate a mental health problem, or
increase its intensity,” he said. Avnon said addiction is a chronic brain and mental disorder. “Those who become addicts will suffer from this disorder for
life. It will take a very long time to become capable of managing the effect,
but it is incurable.” According to Avnon, in his experience, most people started
smoking dagga in their early teen years, but people between the ages of 18 and
35 years old show the most prevalent cases. He goes on to state that the decriminalisation of dagga will
create the possibility of increased abuse among teenagers, because the fear
factor is no longer relevant. “Educators at school will have a difficult time trying to
establish order and discipline. As cannabis is considered the gateway to
harsher drugs, it will have a greater ripple effect as more and more people
will abuse cannabis,” he added. In 2016, the SA Community Epidemiology Network on Drug Use
report concluded that cannabis was the most common primary substance of abuse
for people younger than 20 present at treatment facilities countrywide, except
for Free State, Northern Cape and North West. Shaun Shelly, a drug policy researcher at the University of
Pretoria, also warned that medicinal cannabis would not benefit everyone,
saying: “We’ve kind of swung the pendulum (so) everybody thinks that cannabis
use for everybody is perfectly safe and is going to have no problems – and
that’s not true,” he said. “For some people who have got propensity to psychotic
disorders, using THC (the psychoactive component of marijuana) cannabis is not
good. “We need to realize that cannabis can be useful to some
people and poison to others,” said Shelly. • For more information check: www.holisticreleaf.co.za www.cannaculture.co.za www.cannabisseeds.co.za www.daggacouple.co.za  