Police investigating political killings have raided the home of the uMgungundlovu District Municipality deputy mayor, Fucwana Zungu, in KwaPata near Imbali. While police kept the raid under wraps, Zungu’s neighbours told The Witness that police had conducted a Hollywood-style operation at the house. “It was about 20 of them, some in uniform while others were in plain clothes. You could see that the guys were on serious business and when the occupants of the house took long to open the gates, they jumped over the fence into the premises,” said one neighbour. The raid followed last month’s arrest of Zungu’s son Gift and the deputy mayor’s nephew, Nkosinathi Gambu, in connection with the murder of ANC Pietermaritzburg activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu, who was gunned down by unknown people as he pulled into his driveway in kwaPata in May. Zungu, who was not at home when police swooped, said she has no clue what they were looking for. “No one from the police called me to say they would be visiting or conducting any search at my house. I was told that they just jumped over the fence and screamed at people who were at home,” she said. Gambu is an Msunduzi Municipality councillor while Gift works for the security company guarding Zungu’s home. The pair was arrested with four other people who are suspected of involvement in the murder of Mchunu, a former Msunduzi councillor, who at the time of his death was a council employee. “I’m not sure whether the raid is linked to Gift’s arrest or is a separate issue altogether. “As I said earlier, the police have never communicated with me ...” she said. Mchunu, who lost to Gambu as ward councillor in the 2016 local government elections, was at the time of his murder the voice of ANC members opposed to rigged elections of members to leadership positions. The police raid on Zungu’s house follows the release of the Moerane Commission report into political killings in the province by KZN Premier Willies Mchunu two weeks ago. The report blames the murders of about 100 people on the fight for municipal tenders and jobs. A surge in political killings in the province, including Mchunu and former ANCYL secretary-general and Mzimkhulu Municipality councillor Sindiso Magaqa, saw President Cyril Ramaphosa establish a task team to probe the murders. More than 20 people suspected to be involved in some of the high profile political killings in the province have been arrested in recent weeks. Meanwhile Gambu, Gift Zungu, Skhanyiso Zimu, Sfiso Mbelu, Mlungisi Zimu and Ayanda Ngubane will be back at the Pietermaritzburg­ Regional Court next Thursday and Friday for a bail application. National police spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said police could not comment on the raids, given the sensitivity of the task team’s investigations. “People can say whatever they want to say, our position is that the truth will come out in court. “The most important message which we would want to convey to South Africans at this stage is that the task team is making a lot of progress,” he said.