Ahead of a Cup final, coaches normally have a long list of
tough tasks that need to be carried out before the big day arrives, such as
keeping their players highly motivated for the clash. But according to Sharks’ talented wing, S’bu Nkosi, his
coach Robert du Preez can be excused from that particular duty as the
Durbanites approach the Currie Cup final against Western Province this weekend. The Sharks and Province will meet in the decider of the
domestic competition for the second time in a row, on Saturday at Newlands
Stadium at 4 pm. “It’s a Currie Cup final!” said Nkosi on Tuesday. “If that’s not motivation enough, then you are not where you
are supposed to be, I don’t know what other motivation one would want.” The 22-year-old Springbok played an instrumental role in the
Sharks reaching last year’s final, which was won by Province in Durban, but he
missed it after suffering a bad injury in the semi-final. The youngster is looking forward to playing his first final
at the senior level of rugby and is keen to help the Durbanites get one over
Province after they were denied a chance of Currie Cup glory last year. “I’m very much excited and I want to make sure that when we
fly back to Durban the trophy is with us on the plane,” he said. Nkosi said should they fall to Province again they wouldn’t
have let just themselves and their technical team down but also a number of
people associated with the brand. “It’s been five years since we won the Currie Cup as the
Sharks, so it would be a good reward for everyone that has put in the work to
make sure the union stays operating and stays one of the best brands in South
Africa,” said the wing. “Especially for the people who are behind the scenes like
the CEOs, the accountants and all the people we don’t necessarily see, but they
do their best to keep this place pumping. “You know, it would be great reward for them if we bring the
Currie Cup title to Durban. It will also uplift Durban’s faithfuls who always
come out to King’s Park to support the Sharks.” Nkosi also doesn’t see their opponents as the favourites to
clinch the title. “Of course I don’t agree — I just want to win the Currie
Cup.” Meanwhile, Jaco Peyper will be refereeing his fourth Currie
Cup final in seven seasons this week. Saturday’s final will be the third consecutive Currie Cup
final appointment for the 38-year-old Peyper. He will be assisted by AJ Jacobs and Cwengile Jadezweni,
while Shaun Veldsman will handle TMO duties. Peyper’s first final was between the same two coastal sides,
in 2012 in Durban.