 Searches for Chilean national Slavko Andro Yaksic Besoain continue while his father and a member of the Chilean Consulate arrived in Durban late on Thursday afternoon in an attempt to find the young tourist. Besoain, nicknamed “Kako” by family and friends, was last seen in the Dundee area on September 24, believed to be travelling towards Bergville. The 29-year-old had spent several days at the Melusi Christian Community before leaving the area to continue his travels. He was set to fly back to Chile on October 10, but never arrived. Dundee police, as well as The Pink Ladies, have issued statements appealing to people to help find the man. IRS Forensic Investigations chief forensic investigator Chad Thomas said the team had been working since last Thursday after being appointed by Besoain’s uncle to try to find him. He said it appeared Besoain had wanted to immerse himself in South African life and our various cultures, sticking to back routes and staying within rural communities rather than walking the prescribed routes and staying overnight at backpacker lodges. He said IRS, which is based in Johannesburg, travelled to KZN to follow up on leads, meet police officers, and to interview potential witnesses. Thomas said the team travelled from Johannesburg to Memel in the southern Free State, to Newcastle and on to Dundee. From Dundee, the team moved to Tugela Ferry, then to Greytown, to Mooi River, and then back to Johannesburg. Team members were also deployed to Underberg and Bergville. He added that Besoain’s father and a member of the Chilean Consulate had arrived in Durban late on Thursday afternoon. According to Dessie Rechner from The Pink Ladies, Besoain was last seen wearing a top with dark red, brown and yellow stripes, orange “hippie pants”, a blue shirt, Crocs shoes and a big backpack with a green water protector over it. Besoain had dreadlocks but allegedly cut his hair just before leaving the Melusi. Besoain’s brother, Sergio Antonio Yaksic Besoain, told The Witness on Thursday that the family are very worried about Besoain and appealed to the public to help find his brother. Anyone with information on his whereabouts is requested to contact Dundee detective, Captain Mpungose, on 034 299 9700 or 079 500 0515.