Experts have shared ways to manage stress for guardians and pupils, as well as eating and study tips, to prepare them for the last stretch of a matric pupil’s school career. With just 14 days left until their final exams, the youngsters have been urged to use the last few days wisely to prepare for their finals. KwaZulu-Natal Education MEC Mthandeni Dlungwane is also on a matric countdown campaign, travelling all around the province and urging pupils to prepare for their finals. Hendrik le Roux, a former Maritzburg College pupil who bagged seven distinctions for his final exams last year, encouraged matrics to have a “balance”. “You shouldn’t push yourself too hard. Study but also find time to cool down and de-stress.” Le Roux, who is doing his first year in chemical engineering at the University of Pretoria, said getting straight As helped him have more options of what to study after school. “Good marks made it much easier because I wasn’t stressing about which university would take me. My main focus was just ensuring that I chose the right career.” Pietermaritzburg educational psychologist Merise Williams said the pressure associated with writing matric finals is understandably stressful — the stress also helps to motivate one to put that phone down and begin studying. However, stress can become excessive and unhealthy and cause you to burn out and break down, she said. “Trying to study when you are overly stressed will undoubtedly restrict your ability to adequately memorise the information you are studying. Preventing excessive stress will better help you meet your studying demands.” First, get organised This reduces the chances of feeling overwhelmed. Draw up a study plan and organise your books and study space accordingly. Secondly, be self-motivated Identify your end goals and have these in sight daily so you are always aware of what you are working towards. This helps remove your thoughts of worry as you visualise your future. Thirdly, be conscious of negative thoughts These may creep up and cause you to doubt your abilities, knowledge and future. Maintain a positive mind-set — stack up all the evidence in favour of the more productive positive thoughts and recognise the flaws in the negative thoughts that cause you to become overly anxious. Lastly, know yourself and trust yourself “If there’s a particular studying method that always works for you and a particular exercise or relaxation technique that works for you, do it,” said Williams. She said the role for parents and guardians of matriculants was very crucial at this time and could make the difference between just a pass and a merit or distinction. She said parents and guardians should ensure that their children are in a conducive environment. “Even if the rest of the household isn’t writing exams, we all need to prioritise our matriculants and ensure the household is free from distractions. “There will be times when he/she becomes overwhelmed, try to be understanding and not lash back in anger but rather make time to simply listen ... be their shoulder to lean on ...” Pay attention to what you eat “Certain eating habits can definitely help a student to stay focused, energised and give them the ability to concentrate on the work they need to do.” Here are some do’s and don’ts from Joyner: “Of course, these eating habits should go hand-in-hand with enough sleep, daily exercise and a well-planned study time-table,” said Joyner. Create a special study schedule Educonnct said having a study plan basically allows pupils to dedicate a fraction of each day of their exam preparation, and let pupils have fun for the entire remaining time. They suggest that pupils: