A DA councillor in Msunduzi Municipality is in hot water for allegedly cheating her way into office by not declaring that she had a criminal record. Rooksana Ahmed, the DA’s councillor in Northdale ward 31, is being investigated by the party’s provincial top brass following a formal complaint lodged with the Federal Executive chairperson, James Selfe, by one of the party’s senior leaders in KZN. The letter writer complains, among other things, that “I have also learned that Cllr Ahmed has not complied with the resolution of the KZN DA PEC (Provincial Executive Committee) regarding police clearance certificate for all public representatives.” The Witness has established that Selfe has forwarded the letter to DA provincial chairperson Francois Rodgers. While The Witness has not been able to get a detailed report on Ahmed’s conviction, police sources say that the embattled DA councillor was convicted for fraud in 2004 and sentenced in 2006. She paid a fine. Unlike in the ANC where councillor candidates are elected by branches, prospective DA councillors face panel interviews where the best candidate in terms of, amongst other things, educational qualifications, is appointed. While it is not clear whether Ahmed’s conviction disqualifies her from becoming a DA councillor, the DA leadership wants her to say why she did not disclose her conviction. “According to the DA PEC resolution, she was supposed to have given the leadership her police clearance report shortly after the 2016 local government elections. I can confirm that she has not done so up to today,” a senior DA member in Msunduzi said. Ahmed is also being investigated for nepotism after she allegedly employed her daughter as ward secretary, a post funded by the Msunduzi Municipality. According to the letter of complaint, she also failed to provide the party leadership with a copy of her driver’s licence. DA councillors are required to possess a driver’s licence. “I humbly bring these issues to your attention for your investigation and appropriate action, as I believe the above mentioned issues could compromise the image and integrity of our party,” read the letter. Contacted for comment, Ahmed, who promised to comment at a later stage, said she was going through a rough time as fraudsters had hacked her cellphone. “They made my cellphone to send messages to several people with requests for cash. The messages make me look like a corrupt person who is extorting money from the community — this is something preoccupying my mind at the moment. “I don’t know anything about the investigation against me as I have not received any notice,” she said. However, Rodgers confirmed that his office was investigating the complaints against Ahmed. “I can confirm that I have sent out requests for responses and that I’m currently waiting for the responses. This is a DA internal matter and I’m not at liberty to provide further details,” he said. 