They were first tied up with rope and then stabbed five
times each on their chests before they had their ears cut off for a traditional
healer. Echoes of the screams of Lwandle (4), Simphiwe (8), Lwandile
(10) and Bandile Mbhele (12) rang in my mind as their aunt Phakamile Mbhele
retold the grisly details of their murders. It is chilling incidents of muthi killings like these that
have captured the country’s attention, raising the question of how prevalent
the instances are involving the theft of human body parts, often even from
people who are still alive. The siblings from the South Coast were killed by their
uncle, Ben Mbhele, last year in September, after he had met a man who spoke
about a plan to kill the children for a lot of money. In a 2004 research article, former SAPS section head of the
Investigative Psychology Section (IPS) and clinical psychologist Gerard
Labuschagne said the reasons for muthi killings differ, but economic prosperity
comes out on top. Referencing several experts and academic papers, he said the
reason for using human body parts is that they are considered to be more
powerful than the usual ingredients used by traditional healers as they contain
a person’s “life essence”. The article titled “Features and Investigative Implications
of Muti Murder in South Africa”, said that the choice of which body parts to
use is guided by the aims of the “client” who approaches the traditional
healer. According to the report, “traditionally, the victim must be
alive when the body parts are removed as this increases the ‘power’ of the
muthi because the body parts then retain the person’s life essence”. Phakamile Mbhele said the unsuspecting siblings were in the
house watching TV, while others were sleeping, when their uncle, in a carefully
planned ambush, turned up the volume on the TV and performed his macabre act. After briefly regaining consciousness, Lwandile seemed to
have tried to flee the uncle, before collapsing and dying outside the house. Ben Mbhele was given four life sentences for killing his nephews and nieces last year in September. The aunt said she was at work when she received a call
informing her about the incident. “I rushed home and was traumatised when I arrived and saw
their bodies covered in blood,” she said. “I don’t think I’ll ever forget that. “I was told Bandile had gone to a neighbour’s house and
complained that an uncle was tying their hands. The neighbour told him to go
home and fetch a blanket and go back to sleep there, but he never went back.” Ben Mbhele was sentenced to four terms of life imprisonment
in March after pleading guilty to the heinous act. While Ben Mbhele conducted the act alone, Labuschagne states
that in muthi murders, there are at least three people involved in perpetuating
the crime. These include the client, the traditional healer and the murderer. “The client who approaches the traditional healer is usually
someone who wants to achieve a measure of personal gain. This may include
financial gain for a business person, power for a politician, or protection for
a criminal,” the report said. He said often, the victims in muthi killings may be known to
the murderer, “perhaps a friend or relative”. The report said that targets can range from a new-born
infant to an adult. “The elderly are perhaps the only age group that is not
targeted in muthi murders, presumably because any muthi made from an older
person is considered weak and ineffective.” This week, The Witness reported that a 34-year-old man was
arrested in Margate after being caught with human body parts.  Roger Thusi (left) was sentenced to life imprisonment in 2012 for the murder of 18-year-old Loyisa Jokweni whose head was found in a freezer. Thusi is pictured with the late inyanga Mduduzi Manqele. Charges against Manqele were withdrawn in the case. He was later killed in a shooting incident with police. According to police, the man was arrested in Marine Drive
after police received information about someone selling human body parts. Police approached the man, who was clad in a traditional
outfit, and asked to search the vehicle. During the search police said they discovered a bucket with
a human skull, hand, torso and other body parts that were cut into small
pieces. The man confirmed to police that they were indeed human body
parts and he told them he used the items to heal people. It is alleged that the man was looking for buyers and
approached a number of traditional healers around the Emanguzi area. The suspect allegedly identified himself as a traditional
healer from Margate. The police said they were approached by traditional healers
after the man told them that he was in possession of human body parts which
were on sale for as little as R4 000. Police spokesperson Thembeka Mbele said it is unknown where
the body parts come from. A DNA analysis will be conducted to confirm if the
body parts belong to more than one person. The man now faces charges of illegal possession of suspected
human body parts. Last January, Zodwa Madlala (34) from eMadwaleni in
Sweetwaters was found with her body badly mutilated and some parts missing. Family members said they believe she was murdered for her
body parts. Speaking to Weekend Witness, her sister Nelisiwe said the
family was shocked by the gruesome manner in which Madlala was killed. Madlala and her family had attended a traditional ceremony
hours before she was killed. “When I left she was with a group of other relatives, who
were planning to go to a tavern in the area, but none of them remembers how or
when she separated from the group as everyone had been drinking.” Nelisiwe said she was shocked when a relative called the
following morning to inform her that they found her sister badly hurt. “When she didn’t return home I thought her boyfriend, who
lives nearby, may have fetched her. Around 5 am on Sunday, I was awoken with
the news. “I rushed to the scene where she was found. She was still
alive but could barely utter a word. She had blood coming out of her mouth; her
tongue had been cut out.” The victim’s left breast, genitals and other body parts were
mutilated. The family said the clothes she was wearing were found next to her. Although no one has been arrested since the gruesome murder,
Nelisiwe pointed fingers at traditional healers who use human body parts to
boost muthi. In 2015, a little albino girl from Elandskop survived an
attempt to trade her off to a traditional healer in Johannesburg for muthi. Speaking to Weekend Witness, the girl’s father, who cannot
be named to protect the minor’s identity, said the child’s mother and
grandmother devised a plan to have the 12-year-old peddled in Johannesburg.
“Fortunately, my daughter heard the entire conversation and alerted me. I
opened a case with the police,” said the father. The worried father said: “Even though my daughter may not
fully understand, we no longer allow her to go anywhere without supervision. As
a father with a child living with albinism, it is my responsibility always to
make sure she is always sheltered and protected from these rituals.” He said the court also granted him a protection order
against the mother and grandmother. People with albinism are often targeted for their body parts
which are sold for various reasons. ‘Not enough police focus’ Mary de Haas, a KZN violence monitor, said muthi killings
have been prevalent for years and not a lot is being done to deal with them.
“It’s a massive problem and my frustration is that the police don’t seem to be
treating them seriously enough. “There should be a dedicated police team looking at this.
When people are arrested, that is when you start tracking down the networks.
It’s not rocket science; the people who they do arrest should be a stepping
stone for finding the networks,” said De Haas. She said it is difficult to stop those who engage in this
practice because they believe in muthi derived from human remains. “It’s a belief system that is very difficult to eradicate
until you get people uplifted and out of poverty and educated.” De Haas, who is also the spokesperson for the Medical Rights
Advocacy Network, said state mortuaries are becoming a playground for the
thriving trade in body parts. “There is a thriving trade in body parts in this
province and, in the past, allegations have been made against mortuary staff
and, some years ago, cases were opened.” In June, the body of a seven-month-old baby disappeared from
the Pinetown mortuary, and it has not been found. Police say the investigation
is ongoing. What are human body parts used for in muthi practices? According to Gerard Labuschagne’s article, the following are
beliefs associated with the different body parts. • Breasts — A source of “mother luck”. If you want to
attract women for your business, you will use breasts. Breasts contain fat,
which is considered very lucky. • Genitals — “Luck” resides in the genitals of a man and
woman. Often used for virility purposes. • Throat — Blood is an important ingredient and may be
collected by cutting the throat. • Hands — used to attract business, hands symbolically
beckon customers and take money. • Limbs — May be stolen from a hospital after an amputation.
A leg can be sold for more than R7 000 in Lesotho. • Tongue — Used to smooth the path into a woman’s heart. • Eyes — Supposed to give far-sightedness.   Witches and charlatans The KwaZulu-Natal Traditional Healers’ Association, a body
tasked with controlling and regulating the practice of traditional healing in
the province, has labelled traditional healers who use human body parts for
their practices as “witches”. The association’s president, Sazi Mhlongo, lambasted such
traditional healers, saying they are out to blemish the indigenous healing
profession. He said true indigenous healers do not use human parts at
all. “People who use body parts for muthi concoctions are not
healers but witches and charlatans who deserve to be hanged,” said Mhlongo. 

 The association has distanced itself from what it calls
“inhumane and criminal acts perpetrated by witches”. A muthi expert who wanted to remain unnamed, said muthi
killings have been taking place for decades, but are seldom reported. “These crimes are usually covered up or registered as
murders. It’s difficult to keep statistics on these crimes as most of them are
never reported. However, there is definitely a lot more awareness now about
muthi-related crimes than before,” he said. Culturist and South African Traditional Healers Institute
(Sathi) president Bathini Mbatha said: “This is a bad thing which should not be
accepted. As far as I am concerned, such practices have nothing to do with
indigenous healing but are the works of witchcraft.” Mbatha said it is concerning that muthi killings are often
prevalent in KwaZulu-Natal. “These killings taint the image of traditional
healers in the province. It’s concerning that our province has become a hot
spot for these killings,” said Mbatha. 