A man was on Tuesday found guilty for the 2016 killing of a security guard who was walking home from where he worked at the landfill site. Zokusho Malembe was convicted in the Pietermaritzburg high court based on a confession he made that he killed Mfanizana Mbatha. There were also witnesses who testified that he tried to sell the gun he stole from Mbatha to them. Sanele Zuma, who stood trial with Malembe, was acquitted due to the lack of evidence. Mbatha was killed on February 5, 2016. The court found that Malembe saw him walking and decided to rob him of his 9mm pistol, cash and other belongings. He stabbed Mbatha several times and left him to die near Arthur Thompson Road, Willowton. His wife, Nomusa Mbatha, spoke about the effect his death has had on her and her family in a victim impact statement that was submitted to the court. Recalling the day that changed her life forever, she said that she and some other people were looking for him when she saw him dead on the road. “My heart was broken. It was like I was being ripped apart. The sad thing was that no one from the community came to comfort me until my family arrived. It was hurtful. My neighbours were laughing at me and some were saying that they wanted to see how I was going to survive,” she said. Mbatha added that she had to leave the church she went to because her neighbours made her out to be a bad person. She was also emotionally shattered by what her neighbours said about her. “They used to say that I had killed my husband. It made me sad because I loved and lived with this man for many years. I could not understand their reasoning,” she said. His death also created division among family members who said she was to blame for what happened to her husband. Mbatha said she was not able to sleep at night because she was afraid someone might attack her. Describing her husband as a loving man who helped her whenever he could, she said he was well known in the community. People used to come to him to report if they had problems. He loved helping people and those who were less fortunate than himself. Many things changed since his death, she added. Their eldest son died and she found it difficult to cope without her husband. Mbatha was unable to send her son and daughter to university because she could not afford to do so. They were forced to find jobs so that they could help her out financially. “It saddens me that I could not make them happy like how I used to when their father was alive. I was left with accounts that I could not pay, she said. Sentencing takes place today.