The Sharks are in such high spirits at the moment that even
the confirmation on Thursday of the Lions getting back three powerful
Springboks for Saturday’s Currie Cup semi-final in Durban is of little bother
to them. Earlier this week, several Sharks players brought out their
musical “talent” to “produce” a catchy song for their fans on the team’s
Twitter account, and the great mood was still evident at training on Thursday
as coach and captain expressed limited fear of coming unstuck this weekend. The “hit” the players mimed was the Backstreet Boys’
Everybody, and they hope their fans not only enjoyed the Twitter experience,
but will come in their numbers to back them at King’s Park at 2.30 pm on
Saturday. Sharks coach Robert du Preez, who has made minimal changes
to the team for the match, says they had to create some kind of fun to help
players with tense nerves ahead of the game. “Obviously, the boys were getting nervous because some of
them haven’t played in a match like this, so yes, there’s a fantastic spirit in
the team. It’s really been great and it’s nice to see the boys having fun off
the field as well,” said Du Preez. Captain Louis Schreuder said: “Obviously, there will be a
bit of tension because it is a big game, but as long as everyone is confident,
positive and excited for the weekend, I think it’s a good thing.” Du Preez made only three changes, with Thomas du Toit and
Marius Louw back in the starting line-up. Louw is back at inside centre as
Robert du Preez junior moves back to flyhalf, while Connie Oosthuizen drops to
the bench to make way for Du Toit. In the other change, Aphelele Fassi starts
on the bench as Curwin Bosch moves back to fullback after playing at 10 last
week. The second semi-final on Saturday sees Western Province
favoured to beat the Bulls in Cape Town at 5 pm. TEAMS SHARKS: 15 Curwin Bosch, 14 Sbu Nkosi, 13 Jeremy Ward, 12
Marius Louw, 11 Lwazi Mvovo, 10 Robert du Preez, 9 Louis Schreuder (capt), 8
Daniel du Preez, 7 Tyler Paul, 6 Jacques Vermeulen, 5 Hyron Andrews, 4 Gideon
Koegelenberg, 3 Thomas du Toit, 2 Akker van der Merwe, 1 Juan Schoeman.
Substitutes: 16 Chiliboy Ralepelle, 17 Mzamo Majola, 18 Coenie Oosthuizen, 19
Luke Stringer, 20 Jean-Luc du Preez, 21 Cameron Wright, 22 Leolin Zas, 23 Aphelele
Fassi. LIONS: 15 Sylvian Mahuza, 14 Courtnall Skosan, 13 Lionel
Mapoe, 12 Howard Mnisi, 11 Aphiwe Dyantyi, 10 Elton Janties, 9 Nic Groom, 8
Warren Whiteley, 7 Pikkie de Villiers, 6 James Venter, 5 Marvin Orie, 4 Rhyno
Herbst, 3 Jacobie Adriaanse, 2 Pieter Jansen, 1 Sti Sithole. Substitutes: 16
Tiaan van der Merwe, 17 Danie Mienie, 18 Chergin Fillies, 19 Vincent Tshituka,
20 Hacjivah Dayimani, 21 Dillon Smit, 22 Shaun Reynolds, 23 Wandisile Simelani.