Sharks coach Robert du Preez says that an amazing spirit of
brotherhood among his players was the key to their success in the Currie Cup
this season. The Sharks ended their five-year trophy drought when they
stunned Western Province 17-12 in a tightly-contested affair at Newlands
Stadium in Cape Town on Saturday. The last time the Sharks won the Currie Cup was in 2013,
also against Province in Cape Town, and at the time they were coached by Brad
Macleod-Henderson, who had Brendan Venter as part of his technical team and
John Smit as chief executive of the franchise. The victory at the weekend also brought the first piece of
silverware for Du Preez as coach of the Durban franchise since he took the
reins in 2016. The coach came close to winning the domestic title last
year, but he ended up on the runners-up side with Province claiming the title
in Durban. Going into Saturday’s game, Du Preez and his team knew that
they needed more than a good performance to beat Province, who were tipped to
defend the title, and they delivered the goods. “Credit must go to all the players; credit also to the
leadership group. Chiliboy Ralepelle has played a magnificent role this year,
his leadership and his captaincy has been outstanding,” said Du Preez, who shed
a tear after winning the trophy. “We had a theme over the last weeks called “brother for
brother” and the boys really played for each other on Saturday. Credit to every
single player in the team, not just the matchday 23 but all the boys that were
holding bags for a very long season. They all had a massive role in this. “Juan Schoeman, our prop, is the guy that came with it [the
theme] when we were in a meeting and everyone bought into that. The team comes
first and individuals are always second,” said the visibly delighted coach. There was another special moment for the coach as four
medals went to the Du Preez family, with his three sons playing key roles in
helping the Sharks to the title. His eldest son, Robert junior, “defended” the title after
winning it with Province last year, while twin brothers Daniel and Jean-Luc got
their first taste of silverware at the senior level. “I’m very proud of Robert junior, I’m very proud of Jean-Luc
and Dan. It’s just an absolute honour to have won this title. I’m a very proud
dad,” said Du Preez. “It was definitely a relief to have Robert junior in my team
because I’ve never won when I coached against him in the final when he was
playing for Maties and obviously Province. I’m glad for him to win these
back-to-back Currie Cup titles.” A modest Robert junior said: “It’s not about me but the
team. I’m happy that they go away with the victory. It’s nice to have two
Currie Cups behind your name, but I’m happier that the team got it.” After losing at home last year, coach Du Preez was also
happy that they got to upset Province in Cape Town. “It’s always nice to come to someone’s backyard and win.
Province is a great team and they play fantastic rugby, so credit to them and
the way that they play,” he said. “In the final if you take your opportunities, you walk away
with the trophy. This is massive for the union. We have to keep on building on this;
I believe we have the squad to be a force to be reckoned with in the Super
Rugby next year.” 