A city teenager was abducted on her way home from a wedding, drugged, gang-raped and stabbed. She was within sight of her home in Ashdown when she was abducted. Her aunt, who cannot be named to protect the identity of the girl, said her niece (16), who is a poet, had attended a wedding on Saturday to recite her poetry. She said the teenager was dropped off about three houses away from her home at around 6 pm. “She told us that a white Corolla with three men inside approached her, and because she thought they wanted directions, she went closer. One man grabbed her and covered her face with a cloth which had some chemical on it and she passed out. “She woke up in a shack and remembers being raped by three men. In the early hours of Sunday morning they covered her face and drove her back to Ashdown where they dumped her at the main bridge, which is a short distance from home. She said she started running down the bridge towards the river thinking they would come back for her,” she said. The woman said the family had been worried about the teen’s whereabouts and had called relatives and neighbours asking them if they had seen her. She said the girl was found visibly shaken by community members near the bridge around 4 am on Sunday. Her aunt said: “We immediately rushed her to hospital where the doctor confirmed that she had been raped. “She has a stab wound on her inner thigh and strangle marks on her neck. Her throat still hurts when she tries to swallow her food.” The aunt said they were “heartbroken” but glad the girl was back home. “We as her family are trying to be as supportive as we can. We were also advised to not talk to her about the incident as yet but to talk to her about things that will make her happy. She’s receiving counselling and seems to be slowly coming around.” Ward councillor Dumisani Phungula said the “unfortunate incident” was not the only crime in the area. He said there have been several incidents involving unknown vehicles whose occupants had robbed residents. “I just want to raise awareness in the community that we cannot overcome crime by dealing with it in isolation, we need to unite and work together with all the community structures and police. “It is also important that the public is aware that the crime level in our community is very high and they need to take precautions like ensuring that their homes are properly secured and that they always walk in groups.” Phungula encouraged the public to report all crimes to the police and said if they were uncomfortable with that, to report it to the community policing forum or the street safety committees. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said no one has been arrested for the rape.