“She told me that
when the car door opened and she saw four men telling her to get inside, she
thought she was going to die.” This is what an
emotional Clarendon mother told The Witness after four men allegedly tried to
kidnap her 14-year-old daughter near Voortrekker High School on Wednesday
afternoon. The mother, who can’t
be named to protect the identity of her daughter, said at around 3 pm on Wednesday, she received a text
message from her daughter asking her to call her. “When she answered,
she could not speak. She was just making these garbled sounds and I knew
immediately that something was not right,” said the tearful mother. “She was walking
home, because we live close to her school, when she saw this metallic red
Suzuki. “Last week, my
daughter told me that she thought she was being followed by a car, the red
Suzuki, and that she felt uncomfortable. “At the time, I told
her not to be silly because there are so many people driving around that area.
I thought the car probably belonged to a parent or a resident. Looking back
now, I should have taken her seriously, but you do not like to even think that your
child could be in danger,” she said. The mother said the
call with her daughter ended abruptly when a woman she did not know started to
speak. “She told me that she
had my daughter at her house, that she was alright but that she was very scared
and I needed to get her home. “When I got there, my
daughter threw her arms around my neck and just collapsed. It’s like she just
crumpled around me. “She told me she had
started to walk up Roberts Road in Clarendon when she spotted the metallic red
Suzuki on the opposite side of the road. “She said the man in
the driver’s seat wound down his window and told her to get inside. She thought
they were just being silly so she told them to go away and carried on walking.” However, instead of
driving away, the car allegedly swung around quickly, almost riding over the
teen and drew up on the side of the road she was on. “She told me that was
when one of the back doors opened and she saw there were four men inside the
car. One man was telling her to get into the car. “She said when she
saw the back door open, she felt like she was going to die, that somehow, she
was already gone,” said the panicked mother. “She then started
screaming. She told me she felt like she was attacking the air. She threw
everything she was holding down on the ground, and just ran.” The mother said the
car disappeared up Cordwalles Road once her daughter had attracted attention
from a Roberts Road resident who looked after her until her mother arrived. “She was so shaken.
Last night [Wednesday] there were some fireworks and my daughter just dropped
to the floor and started screaming; ‘They are shooting at me’, over and over
again. It has been horrible. “I have been trying
to let her know she is safe now but she will be going for counselling. “I cried all of last
night [Wednesday]. I am just so grateful. I could have lost my child and it hit
me so hard. “She was in my arms
last night but she almost wasn’t.” The mother said she
would be opening a case and that Magma Security had been “very supportive”.
Shaheen Suleiman of Magma Security said they are investigating the incident. “Listen to your
children when they talk and make sure they know they can trust you,” the teen’s
mother said yesterday. “If your child tells you about something that makes them
feel uncomfortable, take them seriously.” She added that
“stranger danger” was something that needs to be retaught in schools and
communities and that parents should tell their children not to talk to people
they do not know, even if it means being rude. “It does not feel
safe anywhere, not even that area outside my house.” Local police said
they are aware of the incident, and a staff member from Voortrekker High School
said a community meeting concerning the matter would be announced soon. The school did not
respond officially. Incidents rising in
the city Earlier this month, a
city teenager was abducted, gang-raped and stabbed while on her way home from a
wedding. She was just a few
metres from her home in Ashdown when the incident occurred. As reported in The
Witness, the 16-year-old girl told her family a white Corolla with three men
inside approached her. She had initially thought the men wanted directions so
she went closer to the car, but the men grabbed her. She told her family
she remembered being raped by three men, and was stabbed on her inner thigh and
had strangulation marks around her neck. The men then dumped her in Ashdown
early the next morning. In late September
this year, an 11-year-old Northdale boy narrowly escaped being kidnapped from
outside his school at the corner of Ghandi and Ramlingum roads. A black BMW with just
the driver in it approached him. The man said ‘Boy, your mother said I must
come pick you up. Come’.” The boy luckily did
not believe the man and ran back to the school. Earlier this month,
local businessman Asif Muhammad was arrested for allegedly conspiring to kidnap
the children of local wealthy business people for ransom. He is out on R5 000 bail and will reappear in court on
November 19. Tips to help protect your
kids Security consultant
and self-defence trainer David Allen said all successful attacks had three
elements: surprise, speed and violent action. “Make sure you are
always aware of your surroundings and what is going on around you. Be alert and
try and eliminate that element of surprise.” He said if a person
or child was walking home and felt they were being followed, they should cross
the street and see if the pursuers did the same. He said if they do, the person
being pursued should zig zag across the road while trying to alert someone for
help and to confuse the men. He also said, that if
someone stopped their car near you while walking, you should keep a good few
metres between yourself and the car. Then if the person tries to pull you into
the car you can run. “While you run,
remember to scream to attract as much attention as possible while getting as
far away as you can.” He said children
should be well aware of stranger danger and that parents should ensure their
children know their cellphone or work numbers as well as their addresses off by
heart. “Teach your children
not to take things from strangers ...” he said. 