The Pietermaritzburg man whose family claim was taken away by the police task team investigating political killings in KZN is still missing a month after his “arrest”. “I have been to all police stations around Pietermaritzburg while other relatives have been to court but our search drew to a blank,” the man’s grandfather, Mzungelwa Hlengwa (83), said. He said Nkanyiso Hlengwa (31) was picked up by police on September 8. “They kicked down doors, pinned him down before bundling him into one of the several cars they had parked outside the house — it was a scary sight.” Nkanyiso was arrested the same day as other suspects currently in police custody for the murder of ANC Pietermaritzburg activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu, who was gunned down as he pulled into his driveway in kwaPata in May. However, unlike the other six accused, who are due to reappear in court on Thursday for a bail application, Hlengwa is yet to make a court appearance. The Witness has since established that Hlengwa made a call to his girlfriend, who lives near his grandfather’s house, shortly after his arrest. “He told me that he was in police custody but did not know the location where the police were detaining him. I did not hear from him again after that call,” said the girlfriend, who did not want to be named. The task team, which was established by President Cyril Ramaphosa in June following a spate of political killings in KZN, has since made a series of arrests. Police Minister Bheki Cele said the number of people arrested in connection with the political killings that had been taking place in the province since 2012 stood at 23 by September 13. Despite Cele having confirmed at a media briefing last month that members of the task team had arrested other suspects in addition to the six who have appeared for Mchunu’s murder, police could not confirm if Hlengwa was one of them. “Our view is that basically all investigations in political killings, including in the Mchunu matter, are sensitive. We are of the view that divulging information on the investigations could seriously compromise our case,” national police spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said. In the meantime his grandfather’s hopes of ever finding his grandson are waning. “It has been a long time since he was taken away and I’m now beginning to fear that he might be dead,” he said.