It is not unusual to see a driver roll down his window, hold
out a bag stuffed with fast food garbage, a soft-drink can or a cigarette stub
and drop it on to the street or highway, then casually speed off. It is also not unusual to see pedestrians or shoppers
shamelessly add to the mess with all sorts of debris. Pietermaritzburg’s litter is part of a countrywide waste
management problem. Cigarette butts, snack wrappers, take-away food and beverage
containers are the most commonly littered items. A worldwide study found that cigarettes were one of the most
dangerous forms of litter. The study said that a discarded cigarette butt takes
12 years to break down, all the while leaching toxic elements such as cadmium,
lead and arsenic into soil and rivers. While the burden of litter clean-up usually falls to local
government, Msunduzi waste management senior manager Cyril Naidoo said with
more residents individually or collectively working in conjunction with the
City, a lot can be done. He said Pietermaritzburg residents can play a major role by
not littering themselves or tolerating others littering our streets. “As a pedestrian, don’t litter. Always remember to take your
garbage with you when leaving a park or other public space.” Naidoo said the city was cleaned at night and remained clean
until the morning when commuters arrived. He said to intensify its campaign of keeping the city clean,
the waste management unit had augmented its fleet. “We have purchased eight refuse compactors, two hooklift
trucks and two four-ton trucks to improve our fleet. We do, however, have some
challenge in terms of delays in repairs, due to the specialised nature of the
trucks and the time taken to access spares.” Naidoo said these issues were being dealt with, following an
intervention by councillors and the strategic management committee. He said the city street cleaning is currently undertaken by
60 day shift employees and 30 night shift employees. Naidoo said while the city had enough bins, many residents
did not use them. “Bins are carried in stock and replaced as and when
required. Litter is due to the irresponsible behaviour of businesses, shoppers
and pedestrians.”  Naidoo said the City had recently appointed five peace
officers and a prosecution officer, who are dealing with investigations and
prosecutions. He said 10 peace officers are deployed throughout the city
and assigned to specific hotspots. “The city has cameras strategically placed to help identify
illegal dumpers and litter bugs,” he said. He said while the municipality issued penalties to the
offenders, credible evidence is required for successful prosecutions. Currently, fines issued are for amounts of R1 000, depending
on the legislation used, but Naidoo said he was addressing an increase in the
fine in the next financial year. He said there were ongoing campaigns by the Msunduzi to keep
the city clean. Green Network environmental campaign co-ordinator, Nkanyiso
Khumalo said the municipality should encourage recycling and integrate waste
pickers in its waste management plan. “Waste pickers play an important role in cleaning our areas
as they pick up and collect waste materials daily to sell for income. They
invest much more energy and time more than municipal workers but they are not
assisted with equipment to improve their working conditions,” said Khumalo. Local man’s anti-litter crusade A Pietermaritzburg anti-litter activist, Mark Coghlan, says
that incentivising unemployed people to collect litter could save the city from
the litter crisis. Coghlan suggests that Msunduzi Municipality should subsidise
people at intersections to collect waste off the streets. In Langa, Cape Town, an initiative spearheaded by Polyco and
funded by the Packa-ching project encourages residents to collect recyclable
waste in exchange for cash. “I know it’s very menial work but I always think
how much better it must be to have some money in your hand that you’ve earned
...” Coghlan who is also on a lonesome anti-litter crusade in the
Southgate area said while people voluntarily collected recyclable litter, they
received small returns. “I use to have a bakkie and I used to load it up with
cans and then take it out for recycling. For an entire bakkie load, I remember
getting about R8. I couldn’t even buy coke. “It wasn’t worth my while. If the municipality could
subsidise unemployed people to bring in waste instead of standing at
intersections, the city can be kept clean.”  The cycling enthusiast said he felt “embarrassed” that there
was minimal effort to present the city proudly for big events such as the
Amashova, taking place tomorrow. He agreed that the municipality was not
entirely to blame for the filth, and that residents must also take initiatives
to clean up. “It’s not all the municipality’s fault and issue. Where I
live I know there aren’t any bins, but if I get into town, I have picked up
stuff literally next to the bins … as it makes no difference that it’s there or
not. It’s an attitude and a civic pride thing. “The attitude is that if you do not litter, you are actually
depriving people of work. “It’s a bizarre kind of logic that by throwing litter, you
are creating employment. One has to try and overcome that mentality somehow.”  Coghlan said another problem was that because of the
apartheid connection, most people did not regard town as part of home. “If
everyone did their bit, things could improve ...”  Professor of cultural studies at the Durban University of
Technology, Jean-Philippe Wade said the decision to use inorganic materials,
such as single-use plastic bottles, packets and wrappers, stemmed from a need
to show off consumption. “It’s a sign of modernity, a signifier of wealth,” he
said.  Wade said this was perpetuated by advertising where cans,
bottles and items with unnecessary packaging were shown as desirable. “On
campus when a student litters and is asked to pick it up, some respond ‘Why
should I?’ Others say they are creating jobs, or that it is the institution’s
job to pick up litter,” he said.  Why the city is in a mess  In June, a report by former senior waste management manager
Riaz Jogiat highlighted the lack of implementation of by-laws, staff shortages
and inadequacies with the waste collection system.  The report said that the situation had deteriorated to the
point that the municipality cannot ensure that streets in the CBD are cleaned
daily or weekly.  “There are allegations that some staff working at night do
not work an entire eight-hour shift. The lack of daily written work plans for
all street sweeping staff based on demand makes it easier to abscond and lack
of supervision to go unnoticed,” said Jogiat in the report.   The report said that Pietermaritzburg has less than 30% of
bins at the recommended interval of 50 to 100 metres because there is no stock.  It said that the majority of businesses had also declined
the free wheelie bins from the municipality.  What the by-laws say  According to Msunduzi waste management by-laws, “no person
shall dump, deposit, discharge, spill or release waste, or cause or permit such
waste to be dumped, discharged, spilled or released, whether or not the waste
is in a container or receptacle, in or at any place, whether publicly or
privately owned, including but not limited to vacant land, rivers, waterways,
catchments, sewers and storm water drains, except in a container or at a place
which has been specially indicated, provided or set apart for such purpose”.  The by-laws also state that: “No person shall, while driving
a vehicle, or while being conveyed in a vehicle, throw or deposit waste in or
any public space and no driver of a vehicle shall allow or permit any passenger
in such vehicle to throw or deposit such waste in a like manner.”  Calls for stricter penalties  Concerned residents have called for the City to conduct
litter patrols to ticket and fine litterers.  Commenting on The Witness Facebook page, Justin Arnold
agreed that tougher action could curb the scourge.  “It’s simple; punish people who litter. Let’s start there.
We have a lawless society because there is no one ever around to enforce
regulations,” said Arnold.  Rikesh Ishwarlall also agreed that imposing fines on people
who litter could help to curb the problem.  Nkosinathi Khumalo said he had noticed a lack of dust bins
in the city.  “If I have to discard something I’m compelled to keep it on
my car’s glove compartment until I get home,” he said.  Kate Watts said: “The litter definitely seems to be worse
along taxi routes. A lot of stuff is being thrown out of windows.  “Perhaps, some kind of bin system on taxis and buses and
education of conductors for passengers would be useful although I’m sure they’d
need some kind of incentive to co-operate.”  Resident Diane Heather Carbutt Earl said businesses that use
large amounts of paper and plastic also needed to be educated about recycling.  Renier de Bruin said: “My worry is that some shop owners do
not even care. Can we create a group and start a clean-up campaign using all
the beggars at all the traffic lights?”  In 2016, the Municipal Services and Living Conditions survey
said that about 74% of those who participated in the survey said their area had
moderate to extremely bad litter while over 80% agreed that the city centre had
the most litter strewn on the streets.  The survey findings showed that more needs to be done by way
of cleaning the city.  “This would also mean the involvement of local communities
to take responsibility to clean their areas of residence and business, vendors
and entrepreneurs to become responsible to also keep the city clean,” according
to the report.   