Failure to follow legal processes has led to Msunduzi coughing up R2 million to settle with its former head of infrastructure services, Sabatha Nomnganga. Opposition parties say the agreement is illegitimate as there was no council resolution to approve it. Nomnganga was suspended in July last year over allegations of financial mismanagement concerning two projects, including the installation of electricity meters. He was alleged to have cost Msunduzi more than R5 million in fruitless and wasteful expenditure by paying service providers for work not done. In June a council meeting collapsed when councillors walked out after the now-suspended City head Sizwe Hadebe tabled a report for the noting of Nomnganga’s dismissal. They asked that a comprehensive report on the outcome of the investigation be brought before council. A group of ANC councillors and their colleagues from the opposition parties also questioned the timing of the decision to fire Nomnganga. This came shortly after Nomnganga had confirmed to The Witness that it was his voice on the damning audio clip where senior ANC leaders and the City management colluded in the irregular appointment of former DA councillor Clive Lotz as a manager in the office of the speaker. Nomnganga challenged his dismissal at the SA Local Government’s bargaining council and last week Msunduzi agreed to pay him more than R2 million to settle the matter. According to sources close to the investigation, the City would have lost the case as numerous processes had been flouted since his suspension. When contacted for comment Nomnganga confirmed that the parties had reached an “amicable and generous settlement”. He declined to confirm the figure, saying he was not at liberty to disclose the contents of the agreement. “It’s not a golden handshake … The whole process has been very stressful since the beginning and I’ve been saying since then that I was not guilty of any wrongdoing.” The opposition parties said the biggest losers in the settlement were the people of Msunduzi, whose rates were being used to cover up incompetence.