The higher they fly, the harder they fall. A trite saying, but one that echoes in my head often in my
career. We see it all the time and often mutter it among ourselves in our daily
news conferences. And this week’s headlines dished up one of the best examples
of this. Wednesday’s newspaper carried Bill Cosby’s (81) photograph
on the front cover. He’s in disgrace. Deep disgrace. His expression is that of a doomed man, having been
sentenced to up to 10 years imprisonment for the sexual assault of a woman. He
knows there’s no sympathy for him. No one thinks he’s funny anymore. Let’s go back to all those years ago when so many of us
looked forward to the Cosby Show on TV. It was easy on the brain after a day
down the coalmine and good for a laugh or two. Many of us became quite fond of the character played by
Cosby, the dear Doctor Huxtable. He was wise and witty with good, solid family
values. And safe. So very safe. We watched him with his wife and thought, that’s probably
what a good husband should be. We watched his interactions with his children, especially
his daughters, and thought that’s what a good father should be. He kept us
chuckling and sometimes even made us think. There was nothing, at all, that
gave us a hint that he could be a danger to young women. There was no warning
sign flashing. And human nature, I suppose, means that a part of us
associated his wonderful character with the man himself. We trusted him, the
image of the man we thought he was. It’s exactly the same with the once-delightful Rolf Harris
(I still can’t help singing Tie Me Kangaroo Down Sport in my head every time I
hear his name) — the avuncular, multitalented funny man, who painted Queen
Elizabeth’s portrait and sang at her diamond jubilee. How much more respectable
can you get? Both essentially comedians, they made us laugh. They were
funny looking really, and remember the faces they’d pull? Cosby with his
bulging eyes. Harris with his, erm …. didgeridoo. But back then, there was no
creepy sexual thing going on. The vibe they exuded on the TV screen was all
innocent. They were like your favourite uncle and as far removed from
“dodgy”  as is possible. But, how much more creepy can you get? A man who models
perceptions of himself on the antithesis of what he really is. Dear, sweet Cosby was also capable of drugging and sexually
assaulting a woman he called his friend. And she’s only one of about 60  who came forward accusing him of rape,
drug-facilitated sexual assault, sexual battery, child sexual abuse and sexual
misconduct dating back as far as the mid-sixties. He was deemed a “sexually
violent predator” by the court that sentenced him. Harris has now finished serving his time in jail. He served
three years of his sentence of five years and nine months, for 12 counts of
sexual assault. Now no TV network wants to touch reruns of their shows.
Colleges and universities have taken back the honorary degrees they conferred
on them. They’ve gone from being the darlings of the TV screen to
being the reviled. The mention of their names now evokes disgust among we who
were their fans. Their actions impacted their victims in a way that
irrevocably changed their lives. The thing though, and the whole point of this
column is, that somehow, for those of us who ever enjoyed a Cosby Show or
laughed at Harris’s clown-like actions, beneath our revulsion for these men, we
feel foolish for having loved them. Our memories of them are now tainted. We
feel betrayed. And stupid for being conned by them. 